## Biochemistry Basics {.page_break_before}

### Proteins

Proteins are large biomolecules or biopolymers made up of amino acids which are linked by peptide bonds. 
They perform various functions in living organisms ranging from structural roles to functional involvement in cellular signaling and the catalysis of chemical reactions (enzymes). 
Proteins are made up of 20 different amino acids (not counting pyrrolysine and selenocysteine, which only occur in specific organisms) and their sequence is encoded in their corresponding genes.
The human genome encodes approximately 19,778 of the predicted canonical proteins coded in the human genome [@PMID:36318223].
Each protein is present at a different abundance depending on the cell type.
Previous studies have shown that the concentration range of proteins can span at least seven orders of magnitude to up to 20,000,000 copies per cell, and that their distribution is tissue-specific [@DOI:10.1038/msb.2011.82;@DOI:10.1016/j.cell.2020.08.036].
Protein abundances can span more than ten orders of magnitude in human blood, while a few proteins make up most of the protein by weight in these fluids, making blood and plasma proteomics one of the most challenging matrices. 
Due to genetic variation, alternative splicing, and co- and post-translational modifications (PTMs), multiple different proteoforms can be produced from a single gene (**Figure 1**) [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.2369; @DOI:10.1038/s41587-023-01714-x]. 

![**Proteome Complexity.**
Each gene may be expressed in the form of multiple protein products, or proteoforms, through alternative splicing and incorporation of post-translational modifications.
As such, there are many more unique proteoforms than genes.
While there exist 20,000 - 23,000 coding genes in the human genome, upwards of 1,000,000 unique human proteoforms may exist.
The study of the structure, function, and spatial and temporal regulation of these proteins is the subject of mass spectrometry-based proteomics](images/intro-centralDogma-proteoforms.png){#fig:proteoforms tag="1" width="100%"}

#### PTMs

After protein biosynthesis, enzymatic and nonenzymatic processes change the protein sequence through proteolysis or covalent chemical modification of amino acid side chains. 
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are important biological regulators contributing to the diversity and function of the cellular proteome. 
Proteins can be post-translationally modified through enzymatic and non-enzymatic reactions _in vivo_ and _in vitro_ [@doi:10.1093/database/baab012]. 
PTMs can be reversible or irreversible, and they change protein function in several ways, for example by altering substrate–enzyme interactions, subcellular localization or protein-protein interactions [@PMID:33826699; @PMID:24217768]. 

More than 400 biological PTMs have been discovered in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. 
There are many more chemical artifact PTMs that occur during sample preparation, such as carbamylation. 
These modifications are crucial in controlling protein functions and signal transduction pathways [@PMID:23887885]. 
The most commonly studied and biologically relevant post-translational modifications include ubiquitination (Lys, Cys, Ser, Thr, N-term), succinylation (Lys), methylation (Arg, Lys, His, Glu, Asn, Cys), disulfide bonds (Cys-Cys), oxidation (any amino acid, but especially Met, Trp, His, Cys), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr, His), acetylation (Lys, N-term), glycosylation (Arg, Asp, Cys, Ser, Thr, Tyr, Trp) and lipidation [@DOI:10.1042/BCJ20220251].

Post-translational modification of a protein can alter its function, activity, structure, spatiotemporal status and interaction with proteins or small molecules. 
PTMs alter signal transduction pathways and gene expression control [@PMID:28656226] regulation of apoptosis [@PMID:23088365; @PMID:11368354] by phosphorylation. 
Ubiquitination generally regulates protein degradation [@PMID:16738015], SUMOylation regulates chromatin structure, DNA repair, transcription, and cell-cycle progression [@PMID:26601932; @PMID:29079793], and palmitoylation regulates the maintenance of the structural organization of exosome-like extracellular vesicle membranes by [@PMID:30251702]. 
Glycosylation is a ubiquitous modification that regulates various T cell functions, such as cellular migration, T cell receptor signaling, cell survival, and apoptosis [@PMID:22288421; @PMID:18846099].
Deregulation of PTMs is linked to cellular stress and diseases [@doi:10.1038/s41570-020-00223-8].

Several non-MS methods exist to study PTMs, including in vitro PTM reaction tests with radioactive isotope-labeled substrates, western blot with PTM-specific antibodies and superbinders, and peptide and protein arrays [@PMID:11062466; @PMID:12323352; @PMID:35613471]. 
While effective, these approaches have many limitations, such as inefficiency and difficulty in producing pan-specific antibodies. 
MS-based proteomics approaches are currently the predominant tool for identifying and quantifying changes in PTMs. 

#### Protein Structure

Almost all proteins (except for intrinsically disordered proteins[@doi:10.1146/annurev-biochem-072711-164947]) fold into three-dimensional (3D) structures either by themselves or assisted by molecular chaperones [@doi:10.1007/s12013-021-00970-5]. 
There are four levels relevant to the folding of any protein: 

- Primary structure: 
The protein's linear amino acid sequence, with amino acids connected through peptide bonds.

- Secondary structure: 
The amino acid chain's folding: α-helix, β-sheet or turn.

- Tertiary structure: 
The three-dimensional structure of the protein. 

- Quaternary structure: 
The structure of several protein molecules/subunits in one complex.

Of recent note, the development of AlphaFold, has enabled the high-accuracy three-dimensional structural prediction of all human proteins and for proteins of many other species, enabling a more thorough study of protein folding and its relationship to function [@PMID:34265844; @PMID:37732824].
