## 2. Types of Experiments {.page_break_before}
A wide range of questions are addressable with proteomics technology, which translates to a wide range of variations of proteomics workflows.
In some workflows, the identification of proteins in a given sample is desired. 
For other experiments, the quantification of as many proteins as possible is essential for the success of the study. 
Therefore, proteomic experiments can be both qualitative and quantitative. 
The following sections give an overview of several common proteomics experiments.

### Protein abundance changes
A common experiment is a discovery-based, unbiased mapping of proteins along with detection of changes in their abundance across sample groups. 
This is achieved using methods such as label free quantification (LFQ) or isobaric tagging, which are described in more detail in subsequent sections. 
In these experiments, data should be collected from at least three biological replicates of each condition to estimate the variance of measuring each protein. 
Depending on the experiment design, different statistical tests are used to calculate changes in measured protein abundances between groups. 
If there are only two groups, the quantities might be compared with a t-test or with a Wilcoxon signed-rank test. 
The latter is a non-parametric version of the Student's t-test. 
If there are more than two sample groups, then Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) is used instead, followed by a post-hoc test such as Tukey's honestly significant difference test to discover pairwise differences. 
With either testing scheme, the p-values from the first set of tests must be corrected for multiple testing. 
A common method for p-value correction is the Benjamini-Hochberg method [@DOI:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x]. 
These types of experiments have revealed wide ranges of proteomic remodeling from various biological systems. 

### PTMs
Proteins may become decorated with various chemical modifications during or after translation [@DOI:10.1042/BCJ20220251], or through proteolytic cleavage such as N-terminal methionine removal [@DOI:10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.07.026]. 
Several proteomics methods are available to detect and quantify each specific type of modification. 
See also the section on Protein/Peptide Enrichment and Depletion.
For a good online resource listing potential modifications, sites of attachment, and their mass differences, the website www.unimod.org is an excellent curated and freely accessible database.

#### Phosphoproteomics
Phosphoproteomics is the study of protein phosphorylation, wherein a phosphate group is covalently attached to a protein side-chain (most commonly serine, threonine, or tyrosine). 
Although western blotting can measure one phosphorylation site at a time (if using a monoclonal antibody), mass spectrometry-based proteomics can measure thousands of sites from a sample at the same time. 
After proteolysis of the proteome, to achieve competitive coverage of the phosphoproteome, phosphopeptides need to be enriched to be detected by mass spectrometry.
Various methods of enrichment have been developed [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0609836104; @doi:10.1038/msb4100182; @doi:10.4049/jimmunol.176.5.2833; @doi:10.1126/scisignal.2000007].  


A key challenge of phosphoproteomics is the limit of detection.
It is important to ensure that there is a sufficient amount of protein before conducting a phosphoproteomics project because phosphorylated proteins and peptides may represent only ~1% of the total protein.
Many phosphoproteomics workflows start with at least 1 mg of total protein per sample. 
In addition to low stoichiometry, phosphorylation is very labile, and for this reason, great care must be taken in the collection and storage of samples for phosphoproteomics, where proteome denaturation should be rapid and aggressive while including phosphatase inhibitors. 
Newer, more sensitive instrumentation is enabling detection of protein phosphosites from much less material, down to the nanogram-level of peptide loading on the the LC-MS system.
Despite advancement in phosphoproteomics technology, the following challenges still exist: limited sample amounts, highly complex samples, and wide dynamic range [@doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2008.06.006]. 
Additionally, phosphoproteomic analysis is often time-consuming and requires the use of expensive equipment such as enrichment kits.

See the Peptide/Protein Enrichment and Depletion section for more details.

#### Glycoproteomics
The importance of protein glycosylation in health and disease has been known for a long time, but do to high analytical difficulty, only recently has their large scale analysis been gaining traction. 
Protein glycosylation sites can be N-linked (asparagine-linked) or O-linked (serine/threonine-linked). 
Understanding the function of protein glycosylation will help us understand numerous biological processes since this is a universal protein modification across all domains of life, especially at the cell surface [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1093/glycob/cww086; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.019; @doi:10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-034019].

Studies of phosphorylation and glycosylation share several experimental pipeline steps including sample preparation. 
Protein clean-up approaches for glycoproteomics may differ from other proteomics experiments because glycopeptides are more hydrophilic than most peptides. 
Some approaches mentioned in the literature include: filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), suspension traps (S-traps), and protein aggregation capture (PAC) [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.1322 ; @doi:10.1002/pmic.201300553; @doi:10.1074/mcp.TIR118.001270; @doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00505; @doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.0c04726; @doi:10.26434/chemrxiv.13487364.v1].
Multiple proteases may be used to increase the sequence coverage and detect more modification sites, such as: trypsin, chymotrypsin, pepsin, WaLP/MaLP [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M113.034710], GluC, AspN, pronase, proteinase K,  OgpA, StcEz, BT4244, AM0627, AM1514, AM0608, Pic, ZmpC, CpaA, IMPa, PNGase F, Endo F, Endo H, and OglyZOR [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4].
Mass spectrometry has improved over the past decade, and now many strategies are available for glycoprotein structure elucidation and glycosylation site quantification [@doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00128-4]. 
See also the section on "AminoxyTMT Isobaric Mass Tags" as an example quantitative glycoproteomics method.

### Structural techniques
Almost all proteins (except for intrinsically disordered proteins[@doi:10.1146/annurev-biochem-072711-164947]) fold into three-dimensional (3D) structures either by themselves or assisted by molecular chaperones [@doi:10.1007/s12013-021-00970-5]. 
There are four levels relevant to the folding of any protein: 

- Primary structure: 
The protein's linear amino acid sequence, with amino acids connected through peptide bonds.

- Secondary structure: 
The amino acid chain's folding: α-helix, β-sheet or turn.

- Tertiary structure: 
The three-dimensional structure of the protein. 

- Quaternary structure: 
The structure of several protein molecules/subunits in one complex.

Of recent note, the development of AlphaFold, has enabled the high-accuracy three-dimensional structural prediction of all human proteins and for proteins of many other species, enabling a more thorough study of protein folding and is used to predict the relationship between fold and function [@PMID:34265844; @PMID:37732824].
Several proteomics methods have been developed to reveal protein structure information for simple and complex systems.

#### Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS)  
XL-MS is an emerging technology in the field of proteomics. 
It can be used to determine changes in protein-protein interactions and/or protein structure. 
XL-MS covalently locks interacting proteins together to preserve interactions and proximity during MS analysis. 
XL-MS is different from traditional MS in that it requires the identification of chimeric MS/MS spectra from cross-linked peptides [@doi:10.1016/j.ymeth.2015.06.010; @doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085].
XL-MS can be used to gain structural contraints in purified protein systems or at the whole proteome scale. 

The common steps in a XL-MS workflow are as follows [@DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b04431]:  
1. Generate a system with protein-protein interactions of interest (_in vitro_ or _in vivo_ [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M114.042630])  
2. Add a cross-linking reagent to covalently connect adjacent protein regions (such as disuccinimidyl sulfoxide, DSSO) [@doi:10.1021/jasms.9b00085]  
3. Proteolysis to produce peptides  
4. MS/MS data collection  
5. Identify cross-linked peptide pairs using special software (i.e. pLink [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.2099], Kojak [@PMID:25812159; @PMID:36629399], xQuest [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.1192], XlinkX [@doi:doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3603])  
6. Generate cross-link maps for structural modeling and visualization [@PMID:27302480; @PMID:30525651]
(optional: 7. Use detected cross-links for protein-protein docking [@doi:10.1021/ja026939x])

#### Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS)  
HDX-MS works by detecting changes in peptide mass due to exchange of amide hydrogens of the protein backbone with deuterium from D<sub>2</sub>O [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y]. 
The exchange rate depends on the protein solvent accessible surface area, dynamics, and the properties of the amino acid sequence [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1039/C0CS00113A; @PMID:5333290; @doi:10.1017/S0033583500005217].
Although using D<sub>2</sub>O to make deuterium-labeled samples is simple, HDX-MS requires several controls to ensure that experimental conditions capture the dynamics of interest [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y; @doi:10.1586/epr.10.109; @doi:/10.1007/s13361-012-0377-z; @doi:10.4155/bio.15.46]. 
If the peptide dissociation process is tuned appropriately, residue-level quantification of changes in solvent accessibility are possible within a measured peptide [@DOI:10.1021/ac0710782].
HDX can produce precise protein structure measurements with high reproducibility.
Masson *et al.* gave recommendations on how to prep samples, conduct data analysis, and present findings in a detailed stepwise manner [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0459-y].

#### Radical Footprinting  
This technique uses hydroxyl radical footprinting and MS to elucidate protein structures, assembly, and interactions within a large macromolecule [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @DOI:10.1021/ac200567u].
In addition to proteomics applications, various approaches to make hydroxide radicals have also been applied for footprinting studies in nucleic acid/ligand interactions [@doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2005.02.009; @doi:10.1002/0471142700.nc0607s07; @doi:10.1093/nar/gkz089].
This chapter is very useful in learning more about this topic: [@doi:10.1002/9781118970195.ch15].

There are several methods of producing radicals for protein footprinting:  
1. Fenton and Fenton‐like Chemistry [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.elecom.2021.106970; @doi:10.1021/es903739f]  
2. Electron-Pulse Radiolysis [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2013.02.014]  
3. High‐Voltage Electrical Discharge [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.ifset.2022.103055]  
4. Synchrotron X‐ray Radiolysis of Water [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.jprot.2017.09.005]  
5. Plasma Formation of OH Radicals [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.12.017]  
6. Photolysis of Hydrogen Peroxide [@doi:10.1021/cr0682047; @doi:10.1016/j.jasms.2005.09.008]  

#### Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) [@doi:10.1074/jbc.REV119.006218]  
FPOP is an example of a radical footprinting method. 
In FPOP, a laser-based hydroxyl radical protein footprinting MS method that relies on the irreversible labeling of solvent-exposed amino acid side chains by hydroxyl radicals in order to understand structure of proteins.
A laser produces 248 nm light that causes hydrogen peroxide to break into a pair of hydroxyl radicals [@doi:10.1016/j.jasms.2005.09.008; @doi:10.1016/j.ijms.2006.08.018]. 
The flow rate of solution through the capillary and laser frequency are adjusted such that each protein molecule is irradiated only once. 
After they are irradiated, the sample is collected in a tube that contains catalase and free methionine in the buffer, quenching the H2O2 and hydroxyl radicals and preventing secondary modification of residues that become exposed due to unfolding after the initial labeling. 
Control samples are made by running the sample through the flow system without any irradiation. 
Another experimental control involves the addition of a radical scavenger to tune the extent of protein oxidation [@doi:10.1002/pro.3408; @doi:10.1021/ac901054w].
FPOP has wide application for proteins including measurements of fast protein folding and transient dynamics.

#### Protein Painting [@doi:10.1038/ncomms5413; @doi:10.1074/jbc.RA118.007310]  
Protein painting uses "molecular paints" to noncovalently coat the solvent-accessible surface of proteins.
Chemically, these paints may be small aryl hydrocarbon dyes with fast on-rates with very slow off-rates [@DOI:10.1038/ncomms5413].
These paint molecules will coat the protein surfaces but will not have access to the hydrophobic cores or protein-protein interface regions that solvents cannot access. 
If the "paint" covers free amines of lysine side chains, the "painted" parts will be protected from trypsin cleavage, while the unpainted areas will. 
After proteolysis, the peptides samples will be subjected to MS. 
A lack of proteolysis in a region is interpreted as solvent accessibility, which gives rough structural information about complex protein mixtures or even a whole proteome.

#### LiP-MS (Limited Proteolysis Mass Spectrometry) [@doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2020.05.006; @DOI:10.1038/nprot.2017.100; @doi:10.1038/s41596-022-00771-x; @doi:10.1038/nprot.2017.100]  
Limited proteolysis coupled to mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) is a method that tracks structural changes in complex proteomes in response to a variety of perturbations or stimuli.
The underlying tenet of LiP-MS is that a stimuli-induced change in native protein structure (i.e. protein-protein interaction, introduction of a PTM, ligand/substrate binding, or changes in osmolarity or ambient temperature) can be detected by a change in accessibility of a broad-specificity protease (i.e. proteinase K) to the region(s) of the protein where the structural change occurs.
For example, small molecule binding may render a disordered region protected from non-specific proteolysis by directly blocking access of the protease to the cleavage site. 
LiP-MS can therefore provide a somewhat unbiased view of structural changes at the proteome scale.
Importantly, LiP-MS necessitates cell lysates or individual proteins be maintained in their native state prior to or during perturbation and protease treatment.
LiP-MS can also be applied to membrane suspensions, to facilitate the study of membrane proteins without the need for purification or detergents [@doi:10.1073/pnas.2300309120].  
For additional information about LiP-MS, please refer to the following article: [@url:https://www.eubopen.org/sites/www.eubopen.org/files/attachments/2022/LiP-MS%20protocol.pdf]

### Protein stability and small molecule binding  
#### Cellular Thermal Shift Assay (CETSA) [@PMID:23828940; @doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2019.11.004]
CETSA involves subjecting a protein sample to a thermal shift assay (TSA), in which the protein is exposed to a range of temperatures, and the resulting changes in protein stability by quantifying protein remaining in the soluble fraction.
This is done in live cells immediately before lysis, or in non-denaturing lysates. 
The original paper reported this method using immunoaffinity approaches for detecting changes in soluble protein.
The assay is capable of detecting shifts in the thermal equilibrium of cellular proteins in response to a variety of perturbations, but most commonly in response to in vitro drug treatments. 

#### Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) [@doi:10.15252/msb.20199232; @doi:10.1016/j.cbpa.2022.102225; @doi:10.1021/jacs.1c10621; @doi:10.1002/9781118970195.ch11]
Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) follows the same principle as CETSA, but has been extended to use an unbiased mass spectrometry readout of many proteins. 
By measuring changes in thermal stability of thousands of proteins, binding to an unknown or unexpected protein can be discovered. 
During a typical TPP experiment, a protein sample is first treated with a drug of interest to stabilize protein-ligand interactions. 
The sample is then divided into multiple aliquots, which are subjected to different temperatures to induce thermal denaturation. 
The resulting drug-induced changes in protein stability curves are detected using mass spectrometry. 
By comparing protein stability curves across the temperatures between treatment conditions, TPP can provide insight into the proteins that bind a ligand.

### Protein-protein interactions (PPIs)  
#### Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) [@doi:10.1002/iub.1081; @doi:10.1038/nrg3356; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.2400] 
AP-MS is an approach that involves enrichment of a target protein or protein complex using an antibody with specificity toward a protein of interest followed by mass spectrometry to identify the interacting proteins.
If there are no good antibodies for immunoprecipitation of a protein of interest, it may be genetically tagged with an affinity epitope, such as a FLAG or hemagglutinin, which is used to selectively capture the target protein using an antibody against that epitope.
In either case, the protein complex is then purified from the sample using a series of wash steps, and the interacting proteins are identified using mass spectrometry.
The success of AP-MS experiments depends on many factors, including the quality of the antibody used for purification, the specificity and efficiency of the resin used for capture, and the sensitivity and resolution of the mass spectrometer. 
In addition, careful experimental design and data analysis are critical for accurately identifying and interpreting protein-protein interactions.

AP-MS has been used to study a wide range of biological processes, including signal transduction pathways, protein complex dynamics, and protein post-translational modifications. 
AP-MS has been performed on a whole proteome scale as part of the BioPlex project [@DOI:10.1016/j.cell.2015.06.043; @DOI:10.1038/nature22366; @DOI:10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.011].

Despite its widespread use, AP-MS has some limitations, including non-specific interactions, the difficulty in interpreting complex data sets, and the possibility of missing important interacting partners due to constraints in sensitivity or specificity. 
However, with continued advances in technology and data analysis methods, AP-MS is likely to remain a valuable tool for studying protein-protein interactions.

There are other variants of this experiment where instead of an antibody against the protein of interest, the protein of interest can itself be conjugated to a solid phase by expression and purification with a his-tag or fusion to a glutathione s-transferase (GST) domain. 
These approaches may be useful when good antibodies for IP are not available. 

The interaction of any two proteins depends both on their concentrations and their affinity for each other; two proteins could have low affinity for each other, but if present at high concentrations, they will be found together in AP-MS. 
Therefore, key considerations for AP-MS studies are to include negative control antibodies to help distinguish true interactions from background, and including many replicates to assess reproducibility. 

#### APEX peroxidase [@doi:10.1038/nbt.2375; @DOI:10.1126/science.1230593]
APEX-MS is a labeling technique that utilizes a peroxidase genetically fused to a protein of interest. 
When biotin-phenol is transiently added in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, nearby proteins are covalently biotinylated [@DOI:10.1016/j.molcel.2014.06.003]. 
APEX thereby enables the discovery of interacting proteins in living cells. 
One of the major advantages of APEX is its ability to label proteins in their native environment, allowing for the identification of interactions that occur under physiological conditions. 
A key benefit of APEX is that it can detect transient or weak interactors, unlike AP-MS that detects strong and stable interactions. 
Despite its advantages, APEX has some limitations, including the potential for non-specific labeling, the difficulty in distinguishing between direct and indirect interactions, and the possibility of missing interactions that occur at low abundance or in regions of the cell that are not effectively labeled. 

#### Proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) [@DOI:10.1083/jcb.201112098; @doi:10.1074/mcp.R120.001941; @doi:10.1002/pmic.201600123; @doi:10.1091/mbc.E15-12-0844]
BioID is a proximity labeling technique that allows for the identification of protein-protein interactions. 
BioID involves the genetic tagging of a protein of interest with a promiscuous biotin ligase in live cells, which then biotinylates proteins in close proximity to the protein of interest. 
One of the advantages of BioID is its ability to label proteins in their native environment, allowing for the identification of interactions that occur under physiological conditions. 
BioID has been used to identify a wide range of protein interactions, including receptor-ligand interactions, signaling complexes, and protein localization.
BioID is a slower reaction than APEX and therefore may pick up even more transient interactions that occur on longer timescales.
A newer alternative to BioID called TurboID has much higher activity, and is now more commonly used [@DOI:10.1038/s41596-020-0399-0].
BioID has the same limitations as APEX. 
For more information on BioID, please refer to [@doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-8814-3_10].
