## Proteolysis {.page_break_before}

Proteolysis is the defining step that differentiates bottom-up or shotgun proteomics from top-down proteomics. 
Hydrolysis of proteins is extremely important because it defines the population of potentially identifyable peptides. 
Generally peptides between a length of 7-35 amino acid are considered useful for mass spectrometry analysis.
Peptides that are too long are difficult to identify by tandem mass spectrometry, or may be lost during sample preparation due to 
Peptides that are too short are less likely to uniquely match to a single protein. 
There are many choices of enzymes and chemicals that hydrolyze proteins into peptides. 
This section summarizes potential choices and their strengths and weaknesses. 

Trypsin is the most common choice of protease for proteome hydrolysis [@DOI:10.1002/mas.21376].
Trypsin is favorable because of its specificity, availability, efficiency and low cost. 
Trypsin cleaves at the C-terminus of basic amino acids, arginine and lysine. 
Many of the peptides generated from trypsin are short in length (less than ~ 20 amino acids), which is ideal for chromatographic separation, MS-based peptide fragmentation and identification by database search.
The main drawback of trypsin is that majority (56%) of the tryptic peptides are ≤ 6 amino acids, and hence using trypsin alone limits the observable proteome [@PMID: 20113005; @PMID: 25823410; @PMID:30687733].
This limits the number of identifiable protein isoforms and post translational modifications.


3. theoretical studies of proteolysis enzymes [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/960902]
4. Challenges associated with alternative enzyme choices (non-specific and semi-specific enzymes)

Many alternative proteases are available with different specificities that complement trypsin to reveal different proteomic sequences [@PMID:12643544; @PMID:20113005], which can help distinguish protein isoforms [@PMID:27123950].
The enzyme choice mostly depends on the application.
In general, for a mere protein identification mostly trypsin is the choice due to the reasons aforementioned.
However, alternative enzymes are used for de novo assembly when the genomic data information is limited in the public database repositories.
Use of multiple proteases for proteome digestion also can improve the sensitivity and accuracy of protein quantification [@PMID:30336047].
Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C) obtained from  _Lysobacter enzymogenesis_ is a serine protease invloved in cleaving carboxyl terminus of lysine [@PMID:6359954, @PMID:25823410].
Like trypsin, the optimum pH required for its activity is from pH 7-9. 
One among the major advantage of Lys-C is that it is resistant to denaturing agents, including 8 M urea [@PMID: 27123950].
Compared to Arginine, trypsin is less efficient in cleaving Lysine, which could limit the quality of quantitation from tryptic peptides.
Hence to achieve complete protein digestion with minimal missed cleavages, Lys-C is often used in parallel to complement tryspin digestion [@PMID:23017020]. 
Glutamyl peptidase I, commonly known as Glu-C or V8 protease, is a serine protease obtained from _Staphyloccous aureus_ [@PMID: 4627743].
This specifically cleaves at the C-terimus of Glu. 
However, depending on the pH conditions, in addition to Glu (pH 4.0) it is invloved in cleaving Asp (pH 8.0) residues also [@PMID:4627743; @PMID:26748652 ].
Peptidyl-Asp metallopeptidase, commonly known as Asp-N, is a metalloprotease obtained from _Pseudomonas fragi_ [@PMID:2669754].
It is involved in the hydrolysis of Asp residues at the N-terminal of the peptide and works at an optimum pH 4-9.  
As with any metalloprotease, chelators like EDTA should be avoided for digestion buffers when using Asp-N.
Studies also suggests that Asp-N cleaves at the amino terminus of Glu when a detergent is present in the proteolysis buffer [@PMID:2669754]. 
However, it efficiently cleaves at the N termini of Asp than Glu yielding many missed cleavages [@PMID:27123950].

9. Alpha-lytic protease [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.m113.034710] and how it enables mapping human SUMO sites [@PMID:29079793].

Chymotrypsin or Chymotrypsinogen A is a serine protease obtained from porcine or bovine pancreas and works at an optimum pH ranging from 7.8 to 8.0 [@PMID:3555886]. 
It cleaves at the C-terminus of hydrphobic amino acids Phe, Trp, Tyr and barely Met and Leu residues.
Since the transmembrane region of membrance proteins lacks tryptic cleavage sites, this enzyme works well with membrane proteins having more hydrophobic residues [@PMID: 24870543; @PMID:24696503; @PMID:27123950].
Also, the chymotryptic peptides generated after proteolysis will cover the proteome space orthogonal to that of tryptic peptides both in a quantitative and qualitative manner [@PMID:24290761; @PMID:22669647; @PMID:24696503]
Clostripain, commonly known as Arg-C, is a cysteine protease obtained from _Clostridium histolyticum_.
It hydrolyse mostly the C-terminal Arg residues and sometimes Lys residues, but with less efficiency.
The peptides generated are generally longer than that of tryptic peptides.
Arg-C is often used with other proteases for improving qualitative proteome data and also for investigating PTMs [@PMID:25823410]. 
LysargiNase, also known as Ulilysin, is a recently discovered protease belonging to the metalloprotease family. 
It is a thermophilic protease derived from _Methanosarcina acetivorans_ that specifically cleaves at the N-terminus of Lys and Arg residues [@PMID:25419962].
Hence, it enabled discovery of C-terminal peptides that were not observed using trypsin.
In addition, it also favours the hydr0lysis of modified amino acids such as dimethylated or methylated arginine and lysine [@PMID:25419962].
13. Lys-N:
Peptidyl-Lys metalloendopeptidase, or Lys-N, is an metalloprotease obtained from _Grifola frondosa_. 
It cleaves at N-terminal of Lys and has an optimal activity at pH 9.0.
Unlike trypsin, Lys-N is more resistant to denaturing agents and can be heated up to 70 °C.
Reports suggests that the peptides generated after Lys-N digestion produces more of c-type ions in a ETD-based mass spectrometer. 
Hence this can be used for analysing PTMs, identification of C-terminal peptides and also for de novo sequencing strategies [@PMID:18425140; @PMID:20953479].
Pepsin A, commonly known as pepsin, is an aspartic protease obtained from bovine or porcrine pancreas. 
This was the first protease that was identified and crystallized and was awarded the Nobel prize.
Pepsin works at an optimum pH from 1-4 and, in a pH depended manner it specifically cleaves Trp, Phe, Tyr and  Leu [@PMID:25823410]. 
Since it possess high enzyme activity and broad specificity at lower pH, it is preferred over other proteases for MS-based disulphide mapping [@PMID:12476442; @PMID:24980484].
Pepsin is also used extensively for structural mass spectrometry studies with hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX) because the rate of back exchange of the amide deuteron is minimized at low pH [@DOI:10.1021/ac902477u; @DOI:10.1002/mas.21565].  
 

