## 3. Protein Extraction {.page_break_before}

Protein extraction is the initial phase of any mass spectrometry-based proteomics experiment.
Protein extraction is sample dependent; a solution that is effective for plasma proteomics may not work well for plant tissue proteomics. 
Thought should be given to any planned downstream assays, such as specific proteolysis requirements (LiP-MS, PTM enrichments, enzymatic reactions, glycan purification or hydrogen-deuterium exchange experiments), long-term project goals (reproducibility, multiple sample types, low abundance samples), as well as to the experimental question (coverage of a specific protein, subcellular proteomics, global proteomics, protein-protein interactions or affinity enrichment of specific classes of modifications). 
The 2009 version of Methods in Enzymology: guide to Protein Purification [@isbn:978-0-12-374536-1] serves as a deep dive into how molecular biologists and biochemists traditionally carried out protein extraction. 
The Protein Protocols handbook [@isbn:978-1-59745-198-7] and the excellent review by Linn [@PMID:19892162] are good sources of general proteomics protocols.
Another excellent resource is the “Proteins and Proteomics: A Laboratory Manual” by Richard J. Simpson [@ISBN:0879695544; @ISBN:9780879695545]. 
This manual is 926 pages packed full of bench tested protocols and procedures for carrying out protein centric studies.
Any change in extraction conditions should be expected to create potential changes in downstream results. 
Be sure to plan and optimize the protein extraction step first and use a protocol that works for your needs. 
To reproduce the results of another study, one should begin with the same extraction protocols. 

Learning the fundamentals and mechanisms of how and why sample preparation steps are performed is vital because it enables flexibility to perform proteomics from a wide range of samples. 
For bottom-up proteomics, the overreaching goal is efficient and consistent extraction and digestion. 
A range of mechanical and non-mechanical extraction protocols have been developed and the choice of technique is generally dictated by sample type or assay requirements (i.e. native versus non-native extraction).
Extraction can be aided by the addition of detergents and/or chaotropes to the sample, but care should be taken that these additives do not interfere with the sample digestion step or downstream mass-spectrometry analysis. 

In general, a safe and common choice for standard proteomic protein extraction would be to use 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5; the pH is based on optimum trypsin activity [@PMID:25664860]. 
Desalting with StageTips, Waters' SepPaks, or similiar would yield clean peptides.
Triton X-100 and NP-40 should be avoided at all costs. 
The following sections detail the range of choices that are available.

### Buffer and denaturant choice 
#### General proteomics 
A common question to proteomics core facilities is, “What is the best buffer for protein extraction?”
Unfortunately, there is no one correct answer. 
For global proteomics experiments where maximizing the number of protein or peptide identifications is a goal, 50-100 mM of a neutral pH buffer (pH 7.5-8.5) is often used with a strong denaturant. 
Relevant factors for buffer choice include cost, volatility, and reactivity such as primary amine containing. 
Volatile choices like ammonia bicarbonate are desirable because they can be removed by lyophilization. 
However, ammonium bicarbonate promotes methionine oxidation and we generally suggest Tris instead to minimize oxidation.
Tris is desirable due to low cost but can act as a chelator and contains a primary amine, which may be incompatible with some conditions, like TMT labeling. 
Table 1 summarizes common buffers. 
A great online resource to help calculate buffer compositions and pH values is the website by Robert Beynon at http://phbuffers.org.
Although there are a range of buffers that can be used to provide the correct working pH and ionic strength, not all buffers are compatible with downstream workflows. 

Table 1: Common buffers used for proteomic sample preparation. 

| Buffer                                            | Notes                                         |
| ---------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| Phosphate buffered saline (PBS)                            | Non-volatile, inert                           |
| tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris)                     | Cheap, non-volatile, primary amine containing |
| 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) | More expensive, non-volatile                  |
| ammonium bicarbonate                                       | Cheap, volatile, primary amine containing     |
| triethanolamine bicarbonate                                | cheap, volatile, non-primary amine containing |

Complete and quick denaturation of proteins in the sample is required to limit changes to protein status by endogenous proteases, kinases, phosphatases, and other enzymes.
For this reason, buffers must be used in conjunction with a chaotrope or surfactant to denature and solubilize proteins [@PMID:16152629; @PMID:20722421]. 
The choice of denaturant should be governed by compatibility with the protease (typically trypsin) and peptide cleanup steps must be considered. 
Table 2 lists common denaturants used for proteomics. 
Urea is an easy and a common choice because it is compatible with trypsin at <2M and it can be removed by desalting.
However, urea induces carbamylation, which is made worse with sample heating [@PMID:24161613]. 
If intact protein separations are planned (based on size or isoelectric point), choose a denaturant compatible with those methods, such as sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) [@PMID:31249407]. 
SDS is a strong denaturant, but it is not compatible with trypsin or reversed phase materials. 
Sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and sodium laurate (SL) are also strong denaturants with the added benefit of compatibility with trypsin.
For non-MS workflows, detergents containing poly ethylene glycol tails are common, such as triton X-100. 
SDS, SDC, SL, and triton X-100 are incompatible with LC-MS workflows as they can cause ion suppression and column clogging. 
Therefore detergents must be removed before further protein processing. 
Detergent removal options differ based on the chemistry of the detergent. 
Alternatively, mass-spectrometry-compatible detergents may be used, such as n-dodecyl-beta-maltoside (DDM) [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.R114.042572]. 

Table 2: Common denaturants used for proteomic sample preparation. 

| Denaturant                                         | Notes                                            |
| ---------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------    |
| 8M Urea       | Non-volatile, chemically reactive, limit heating, must be diluted to < 2M before trypsin addition |
| 1-5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) | Cheap, strong denaturation and hydrophobicity, must be removed before trypsin |
| 1-5% Sodium Deoxycholate | Hydrophobic for membrane proteins, easy to remove due to precipiation with acid |  
| n-dodecyl-beta-maltoside                          | expensive, low amounts can be used with trypsin and LC-MS     |
| Triton X-100        | Do not use this. If samples already have this or NP-40, proceed with protein precipitation |

#### Detergent removal
Relatively low concentrations of some detergents, such as 1% SDC, or chaotropes such as 1M urea, are compatible with proteolysis by trypsin/Lys-C.
Often proteolysis-compatible concentrations of these detergents and chaotropes are achieved by diluting the sample in appropriate buffer (i.e. 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) after cell or tissue lysis in a higher concentration. 
However, most detergents should be removed prior to enzymatic hydrolysis. 
This is generally performed through precipitation of proteins. 
The most common types are 1) acetone, 2) trichloroacetic acid (TCA), and 3) chloroform/methanol/water (Folch) [@PMID:14753699; @PMID:19892180]. 
Proteins are generally insoluble in most pure organic solvents, so cold ethanol or methanol are sometimes used. 
Pellets should be washed with organic solvent for complete removal of detergents. 
Alternatively, solid phase based digestion methods such as S-trap (ProtiFi) [@PMID:33750040], FASP [@PMID:19377485; @PMID:30259475], SP3 [@PMID:3117935; @PMID:28948796] and on column/bead such as protein aggregation capture (PAC) [@PMID:30833379] can allow for proteins to be applied to a solid phase for detergent removal prior to proteolysis [@PMID:29754492]. 
Specialty detergent removal columns exist (Pierce/Thermo Fisher Scientific) but add expense and time-consuming steps to the process. 
SDC can then be easily removed by precipitation or phase separation [@PMID:18183947] following digestion by acidification of the sample to pH 2-3.   
Ethyl acetate can also remove several common detergents [@DOI:10.1016/j.ab.2008.07.034]. 
Any small-molecule removal protocol should be tested for efficiency prior to implementing in a workflow with many samples as avoiding detergent (or polymer) contamination in the LC/MS is very important. 

#### Protein-protein interactions 
Denaturing conditions will efficiently extract proteins, but will denature proteins and therefore disrupt most protein-protein interactions. 
If you are working on an antibody or affinity purification of a specific protein and expect to analyze enzymatic activity, structural features, and/or protein-protein interactions, a non-denaturing lysis buffer should be utilized [@PMID:21364760; @PMID:10504710]. 
Check the calculated isoelectric point (pI) and hydrophobicity (e.g., try the Expasy.org resource ProtParam) for a good idea of starting pH/conductivity, but a stability screen may be needed. 
In general, a good starting point for the buffer will still be close to neutral pH with 50-250 mM NaCl, but specific proteins may require pH as low as 2 or as high as 9 for stable extraction. 
A low percent of mass spectrometry compatible detergent may also be used, such as n-dodecyl-beta-maltoside.
Newer mass spectrometry-compatible detergents are also useful for protein extraction and ease of downstream processing – including Rapigest® (Waters), N-octyl-β-glucopyranoside, MS-compatible degradable surfactant (MaSDeS) [@PMID:25589168], Azo [@PMID:33232116], PPS silent surfactant [@PMID:21280217], sodium laurate [@PMID:23555778], and sodium deoxycholate [@PMID:17022626]. 
Avoid using tween-20, triton-X, NP-40, and polyethylene glycols (PEGs) as these compounds are challenging to remove after digestion [@PMID:29726681]. 

#### Optional additives 
There are several additional additives that are often found in protein extraction buffer solutions. 
Salts like 50-150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl) may be used to mimic physiological ionic strength. 
Protease, phosphatase and deubiquitinase inhibitors are optional additives in less denaturing conditions or in experiments focused on specific PTMs. 
For a broad range of inhibitors, a premixed tablet can be added to the lysis buffer, such as Roche cOmplete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablets. 
Protease inhibitors may impact desired proteolysis from the added protease, and will need to be diluted or removed prior to protease addition. 
To improve extraction of DNA- or RNA-binding proteins, adding a small amount of nuclease or benzonase is useful for degradation of any bound nucleic acids and results in a more consistent digestion [@PMID:23792921].
For non-denaturing buffer conditions, which preserve tertiary and quaternary protein structures, additional additives may still be neccessary to prevent proteolysis or PTMs throughout the extraction process. 

#### Extraction of plant proteins
Protein extraction from plant tissues generally more challenging due to the presence of cell walls, large vacuoles, and several different classes of interfering substances that are often present in these materials.
Cell walls require vigorous disruption techniques such as grinding with or without an abrasive, use of a bead mill, or homogenizers, which, while they do release the cellular contents, also rupture and mix the contents of organelles and other subcellular compartments.
As a result, isolation of proteins from organelles or other subcellular fractions of plant materials can be fairly specialized [@DOI:10.1385/1-59259-655-X:53; @DOI:10.1016/j.jprot.2019.103542; @PMID:17445689]. 
Plant tissues have lower protein content compared with tissues from other organisms as only a small fraction of the tissue volume is cytoplasm with the apoplast (cell exterior and wall) and vacuole using much of the tissue volume. 
Depending on tissue, cell type and maturity, a plant cell’s vacuole accounts for most of the cell interior space and typically contains substances that degrade or denature proteins upon tissue disruption. 
Isolation of functional native proteins from plants usually requires use of plant-targeted protease inhibitors [@DOI:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2011.07.020; @DOI:10.1093/pcp/pcz028], and strategies for preventing protein modification and precipitation by phenolic compounds and their oxidation products [@DOI:10.1385/1-59259-655-X:65] in addition to the buffers, reductants and other additives discussed previously.

Methodology for whole-tissue protein extraction of plants has been extensively reviewed [@DOI:10.1038/nprot.2006.102; @DOI:10.1002/pmic.201300239; @DOI:10.3389/fpls.2018.00802; @DOI:10.1146/annurev-arplant-102620-031308].
These procedures avoid the sample degradation by protease or phenol oxidase activities that can plague native plant protein purification by using extraction at low temperature followed by protein denaturation and removal of contaminating compound classes using precipitation strategies.
Protein is extracted under denaturing conditions and precipitated using combinations of trichloroacetic acid (TCA), ammonium acetate, or acetone (or other solvent) precipitation.
Initial protein extraction and/or resolubilization of protein precipitates is accomplished using detergents, phenol or other chaotropic agents.
Extraction protocols have been shown to influence proteomic results [@DOI:10.3389/fpls.2018.00802], and the compatibility of extracts with subsequent analytical strategies can vary significantly since protocols that were initially developed for 2D-gel electrophoretic analysis often use detergents that can be problematic for peptide LC-MS/MS proteomic approaches.
More recently developed strategies make use of filters (filter-aided sample preparation, FASP, [@DOI:10.1002/pmic.201800220]) or coated magnetic beads (single-pot-solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation, SP3, [@DOI:10.1038/s41596-018-0082-x; @DOI:10.3389/fpls.2021.635550]) for higher throughput shotgun proteomic sample preparation.
Strategies for overcoming the dynamic range limitations caused by plant-specific hyperabundant proteins have been developed both for RuBisCO [@DOI:10.1007/978-1-4939-2550-6_17], which makes up ~50% of the protein in green tissues of C3 plants, and also for seed storage proteins [@DOI:10.3390/ijms21239162].

### Mechanical or Sonic Disruption 
#### Cell lysis 
Small mammalian cell pellets and exosomes will lyse almost instantly upon addition denaturing buffer. 
If non-denaturing conditions are desired, osmotic swelling and subsequent shearing or sonication can be applied [@DOI:10.1080/10826068.2020.1728696].
Efficiency of extraction and degradation of nucleic acids can be improved using various sonication methods: 1) probe sonicator with ice; 2) water bath sonicator with ice or cooling; 3) bioruptor® sonication device 4) Adaptive focused acoustics (AFA®) [@PMID:21060726]. 
Key to these additional lysis techniques is to keep the temperature of the sample from rising significantly which can cause proteins to aggregate or degrade. 
Some cell types may require additional force for effective lysis (see below). 
For cells with cell walls (i.e. bacteria or yeast), lysozyme is often added in the lysis buffer. 
Any added protein will be present in downstream results, however, so excessive addition of lysozyme is to be avoided unless tagged protein purification will occur. 

#### Tissue/other lysis 
Although small pieces of soft tissue can often be successfully extracted with the probe and sonication methods described above, larger/harder tissues as well as plants/yeast/fungi are better extracted with some form of additional mechanical force. 
If proteins are to be extracted from a large amount of sample, such as soil, feces, or other diffuse input, one option is to use a dedicated blender and filter the sample, followed by centrifugation. 
If samples are smaller, such as tissue, tumors, etc., cryo-homogenization is recommended. 
The simplest form of this is grinding the sample with liquid nitrogen and a mortar and pestle.
Tools such as bead beaters (i.e. FastPrep-24®) are also used, where the sample is placed in a tube with appropriately sized glass or ceramics beads and shaken rapidly. 
Cryo-mills are chambers where liquid nitrogen is applied around a vessel and large bead or beads. 
Cryo-fractionators homogenize samples in special bags that are frozen in liquid nitrogen and smashed with various degrees of force [@PMID:34002278]. 
In addition, rapid bead beating mills such as the Bertin Precellys Evolution are both economical, effective and detergent compatible for many types of proteomics experiments at a scale of 96 samples per batch. 
Finally, pressure cycling such as the option from pressure biosciences is useful for homogenization of many small tissue pieces [@DOI:10.1038/s41596-022-00727-1]. 
After homogenization, samples can be sonicated by one of the methods above to fragment DNA and increase solubilization of proteins. 

### Measuring the efficiency of protein extraction 
Following protein extraction, samples should be centrifuged (10-14,000 g for 10-30 min depending on sample type) to remove debris and insoluble protein prior to determining protein concentration. 
Protein quantification is important to assess the yield of an extraction procedure, to match the amount of protein per sample, and to adjust the scale of the downstream processing steps to match the amount of protein. 
For example, when purifying peptides, the amount of sorbent should match the amount of material to be bound. 
Protein concentration can be calculated using a number of assays or tools [@PMID:18429326; @PMID:12703310]; 
Extraction solution components will need to be compatible with any assay chosen; alternatively, small molecule interferences may be removed (see above) prior to protein concentration calculation.
Each method will have inherent bias and error [@PMID:26342307; @PMID:30234128]. 
These methods can be broadly divided into three types as follows.

#### Colorimetry-based methods: 
The method includes different assays like Coomassie Blue G-250 dye binding (the Bradford assay), the Folin-Lowry assay, the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay and the biuret assay [@PMID:10075906]. 
The most commonly used method is the BCA assay. 
In the BCA method the peptide bonds of the protein reduce cupric ions [Cu2+] to cuprous ions [Cu+] at a rate which is proportional to the amount of protein present in the sample. 
Subsequently, the BCA reagent binds to the cuprous ions, leading to the formation of a complex which absorbs 562 nm wavelength light.
This permits a direct correlation between sample protein concentration and absorbance [@PMID:3843705; @PMID:7951748]. 
The Bradford assay is another method for protein quantification also based on colorimetry principle. 
It relies on the interaction between the Coomassie brilliant blue dye and the protein based on hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions. Dye binding shifts the absorption maxima from 470 nm to 595 nm [@PMID:942051; @PMID:32238597]. 
Similarly, the Folin- Lowry method is a two-step colorimetric assay. 
Step one is the biuret reaction wherein complexes of copper with the nitrogen in the protein molecule are formed. 
In the second step, the complexed tyrosine and tryptophan amino acids react with Folin–Ciocalteu phenol reagent generating an intense, blue-green color absorbing light at 650–750 nm [@PMID:6744121]. 

Another simple but less reliable protein quantification method of UV-Vis Absorbance at 280 nm estimates the protein concentration by measuring the absorption of the aromatic residues: phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan [@PMID:34533299].
This is innacurate because different complements of proteins will have different proportions of aromatic amino acids. 
This approach is also sensitive to small molecule interferences that may absorb a similar wavelength. 

#### Fluorescence-based methods:
Colorimetric assays are inexpensive and require common lab equipment, but colorimetric detection is less sensitive than fluorescence. 
Total protein in proteomic samples can be quantified using intrinsic fluorescence of tryptophan based on the assumption that approximately 1% of all amino acids in the proteome are tryptophan [@PMID:25837572]. 

NanoOrange (Invitrogen) is an assay for the quantitative measurement of proteins in solution using a merocyanine dye that produces a large increase in fluorescence quantum yield when it interacts with detergent-coated proteins. 
Fluorescence is measured using 485-nm excitation and 590-nm emission wavelengths. 
The NanoOrange assay can be performed using fluorescence microplate readers, fluorometers, and laser scanners that are standard in the laboratory [@PMID:12703310].

3-(4-carboxybenzoyl)quinoline-2-carboxaldehyde (CBQCA) is a sensitive fluorogenic reagent for amine detection, which can be used for analyzing proteins in solution. 
As the number of accessible amines in a protein is modulated by its concentration, CBQCA has a greater sensitivity and dynamic range when measuring protein concentration [@PMID:9025944].

### Reduction and alkylation 
Typically, disulfide bonds in proteins are reduced and alkylated prior to proteolysis in order to disrupt structures and simplify peptide analysis. 
This allows better access to all residues during proteolysis and removes the crosslinked peptides created by S-S inter peptide linkages. 
There are a variety of reagent options for these steps. 
For reduction, the typical agents used are 5-15 mM concentration of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl), dithiothreitol (DTT), or 2-beta-mercaptoethanol (2BME).
TCEP-HCl is an efficient reducing agent, but it also significantly lowers sample pH, which can be abated by increasing sample buffer concentration or resuspending TCEP-HCl in an appropriate buffer system (i.e. 1M HEPES pH 7.5).      
Following the reducing step, a slightly higher 10-20mM concentration of alkylating agent such as chloroacetamide/iodoacetamide or n-ethyl maleimide is used to cap the free thiols [@PMID:29019370; @PMID:15351294; @PMID:28539326]. 
In order to monitor which cysteine residues are linked or modified in a protein, it is also possible to alkylate free cysteine residues with one reagent, reduce di-sulfide bonds (or other cysteine modifications) and alkylate with a different reagent [@PMID:32132231; @PMID:28445428; @PMID:23074338]. 
Alkylation reactions are generally carried out in the dark at room temperature to avoid excessive off-target alkylation of other amino acids.
