## 4. Proteolysis {.page_break_before}
Proteolysis is the defining step that differentiates bottom-up or shotgun proteomics from top-down proteomics. 
Hydrolysis of proteins is extremely important because it defines the population of potentially identifiable peptides. 
Generally, peptides between a length of 7-35 amino acids are considered useful for mass spectrometry analysis.
Peptides that are too long are difficult to identify by tandem mass spectrometry or may be lost during sample preparation due to irreversible binding with solid-phase extraction sorbents.
Peptides that are too short are also not useful because they may match to many proteins during protein inference. 
There are many choices of enzymes and chemicals that hydrolyze proteins into peptides. 
This section summarizes potential choices and their strengths and weaknesses. 

Before we get into details of various choices for proteolysis, we must discuss terminology. 
While it's true that "digestion" is commonly used in proteomics, it's important to note that "hydrolysis" is a more specific word choice to describe the chemical process because it refers to breaking peptide bonds within proteins using water. 
Although hydrolysis may be associated with the complete chemical hydrolysis of proteins into amino acids, for example using high temperature and acid, hydrolysis reactions catalyzed by enzymes such as pepsin and trypsin are specific for certain amino acid residues. 
In fact, all methods of protein cleavage to shorter peptides require a water molecule for their mechanism of action. 
In contrast, the definition of “digestion” relates to food breakdown into subunits usable by the body or any chemical process that breaks down substances. 
Therefore, while "digestion" is indeed a widely used term for the conversion of the proteome to peptides, "hydrolysis" more accurately describes the specific biochemical process that occurs. 
We believe that this terminology choice enhances clarity and precision in scientific communication within the field of proteomics.

Trypsin is the most common choice of protease for proteome hydrolysis [@DOI:10.1002/mas.21376].
Trypsin is favorable because of its specificity, availability, efficiency and low cost. 
Trypsin is a sufficient choice for most proteomics experiments.
Trypsin cleaves at the C-terminus of basic amino acids, Arg and Lys, if not immediately followed by proline (although there is debate whether a small number of R/K-P sites are actually cleaved). 
Many of the peptides generated from trypsin are appropriate in length and hydrophobicity for chromatographic separation, MS-based peptide fragmentation and identification by database search.
The main drawback of trypsin is that majority (56%) of the tryptic peptides are ≤ 6 amino acids, and hence using trypsin alone limits the observable proteome [@PMID:20113005; @PMID:25823410; @PMID:30687733].
This limits the number of identifiable protein isoforms and post-translational modifications.

Although trypsin is the most common protease used for proteomics, in theory it can only cover a fraction of the proteome predicted from the genome [@DOI:10.1155/2014/960902]. 
This is due to production of peptides that are too short to be unique, for example due to R and K immediately next to each other. 
Peptides below a certain length are likely to occur many times in the whole proteome, meaning that even if we identify them we cannot know their protein of origin. 
In protein regions devoid of R/K, trypsin may also result in very long peptides that are then lost due to irreversible binding to the solid phase extraction device, or that become difficult to identify due to complicated fragmentation patterns. 
Thus, parts of the true proteome sequences that are present are lost after trypsin digestion due to both production of very long and very short peptides. 

Many alternative proteases are available with different specificities that complement trypsin to reveal different protein sequences [@PMID:12643544; @PMID:20113005], which can help distinguish protein isoforms [@PMID:27123950] (**Figure 2, Table 3**).
The enzyme choice mostly depends on the application.
In general, for a mere protein identification, trypsin is often chosen due to the aforementioned reasons.
However, alternative enzymes can facilitate _de novo_ assembly when the genomic data information is limited in the public database repositories [@pmid:31615963; @pmid:30622160; @pmid:29990557; @doi:10.1016/j.actatropica.2022.106324; @DOI:10.1021/pr400173d].
Use of multiple proteases for proteome digestion also can improve the sensitivity and accuracy of protein quantification [@PMID:30336047].
Moreover, by providing an increased peptide diversity, the use of multiple proteases can expand sequence coverage and increase the probability of finding peptides which are unique to single proteins [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00330; @DOI:10.1074/mcp.M113.034710; @DOI:10.1155/2014/960902]. 
A multi-protease approach can also improve the identification of N-Termini and signal peptides for small proteins [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00115]. 
Overall, integrating multiple-protease data can increase the number of proteins identified [@DOI:10.3390/ijms20225630; @DOI:10.1074/mcp.M113.035170], increase the identified post-translational modifications [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00330; @DOI:10.1016/j.celrep.2015.05.029; @DOI:10.1074/mcp.M113.034710] and decrease the ambiguity of the inferred protein groups [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.9b00330].

There are, however, many challenges associated with using alternative proteases.
Since peptides are not cleaved after a positively charged residue (like the R/K targeted by trypsin), they may only obtain one precursor charge and be ineffectively fragmented. 
The lack of a c-terminal positive charge will lead to less consistent y-ion series.
Other peptides may obtain too many charges and produce highly charged fragments that are not scored well by search engines. 
Another common issue with alternative proteases is the potential for producing "shredded" peptides where multiple peptides differ only by a few residues at either end, thus decreasing the quantity of each species and limiting sensitivity. 
This problem is worse with proteases that target uncharged residues, because ionic interactions are much stronger than dispersion forces used for binding aliphatic residues. 

![**Multiple protease proteolysis improves protein inference**
The use of other proteases beyond trypsin such as lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C), peptidyl-Asp metallopeptidase (Asp-N), glutamyl peptidase I, (Glu-C), chymotrypsin, clostripain (Arg-C) or peptidyl-Lys metalloendopeptidase (Lys-N) can generate a greater diversity of peptides. 
This improves protein sequence coverage and allows for the correct identification of their N-termini. 
Increasing the number of complimentary enzymes used will increase the number of proteins identified by single peptides and decreases the ambiguity of the assignment of protein groups. 
Therefore, this will allow more protein isoforms and post-translational modifications to be identified than using Trypsin alone.](images/Proteolysis_v03.png){#fig:Multiple-protease-proteolysis tag="2" width="100%"}

Table 3: Common proteases used for proteomics. 

|  Protease |  source | class | specificity | optimal pH |  notes |
|:-----------:|:--------:|:--------------------------:|:-----------:|:-----------:|:-----------:|
| Trypsin    | mammal pancreas | serine protease | c-term of R/K, not before P    | 7-9  | most common protease |
| LysC	     | _Lysobacter enzymogenesis_ | serine protease | c-term of K    | 7-9 | high stability | 
| Alpha-lytic protease | _Lysobacter enzymogenesis_ | serine protease | c-term of small side chains | 7-9 | high stability | 
| GluC | _Staphyloccous aureus_ | serine protease | c-term of D/E | 4-8 | specificity for Glu depends on buffer |
| Asp-N | _Pseudomonas fragi_ | metalloprotease | n-term of D | 4-9 | avoid chelators |
| chymotrypsin | mammal pancreas | serine protease | c-term of larger hydroponics | 7-9 |  |
| Arg-C | _Clostridium histolyticum_  | cysteine protease | c-term or R | 7.2-7.8 | avoid oxidation |
| Ulilysin | _Methanosarcina acetivorans_ | metalloprotease | N-term of R/K | 6-9 | stable to 55℃ |
| Lys-N | _Grifola frondosa_ | metalloprotease | N-term or K | 7-9 | stable to 70℃ |
| Pepsin A | mammal pancreas | aspartic acid protease | broad including W, F, Y, L | 1-4 | common for HDX | 
| Proteinase K | _Tritirachium album_ | serine protease | broadest | 4-12 | common for limited proteolysis | 

Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C) obtained from  _Lysobacter enzymogenesis_ is a serine protease involved in cleaving carboxyl terminus of Lys [@PMID:6359954; @PMID:25823410].
Like trypsin, the optimum pH range required for its activity is from 7 to 9. 
A major advantage of Lys-C is its resistance to denaturing agents, including 8 M urea - a chaotrope commonly used to denature proteins _prior_ to digestion [@PMID:27123950].
Trypsin is less efficient at cleaving Lys than Arg, which could limit the quality of quantitation from tryptic peptides.
Hence, to achieve complete protein digestion with minimal missed cleavages, Lys-C is often used simultaneously with trypsin digestion [@PMID:23017020].

Alpha-lytic protease (aLP) is another serine protease secreted by the soil bacterial _Lysobacter enzymogenesis_ [@PMID:3053694].
Wild-type aLP (WaLP) and an active site mutant of aLP, M190A (MaLP), have been used to expand proteome coverage [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.m113.034710].
Based on observed peptide sequences from yeast proteome digestion, WaLP showed a specificity for small aliphatic amino acids like alanine, valine, and glycine, but also threonine and serine. 
MaLP showed specificity for slightly larger amino acids like methionine, phenylalanine, and surprisingly, a preference for leucine over isoleucine. 
The specificity of WaLP for threonine enabled the first method for mapping endogenous human SUMO sites [@PMID:29079793].

Glutamyl peptidase I, commonly known as Glu-C or V8 protease, is a serine protease obtained from _Staphyloccous aureus_ [@PMID:4627743].
Glu-C cleaves at the C-terminus of glutamate, but also after aspartate [@PMID:4627743; @PMID:26748652].

Peptidyl-Asp metallopeptidase, commonly known as Asp-N, is a metalloprotease obtained from _Pseudomonas fragi_ [@PMID:2669754].
Asp-N catalyzes the hydrolysis of peptide bonds at the N-terminal of aspartate residues.
The optimum activity of this enzyme occurs at a pH range between 4 and 9.
As with any metalloprotease, chelators like EDTA should be avoided for digestion buffers when using Asp-N.
Studies also suggest that Asp-N cleaves at the amino terminus of glutamate when a detergent is present in the proteolysis buffer [@PMID:2669754]. 
Asp-N often leaves many missed cleavages [@PMID:27123950].

Chymotrypsin or chymotrypsinogen A is a serine protease obtained from porcine or bovine pancreas with an optimum pH range from 7-9 [@PMID:3555886]. 
It cleaves at the C-terminus of hydrophobic amino acids Phe, Trp, Tyr and barely Met and Leu residues.
Since the transmembrane region of membrane proteins commonly lacks tryptic cleavage sites, this enzyme works well with membrane proteins having more hydrophobic residues [@PMID:24870543; @PMID:24696503; @PMID:27123950].
The chymotryptic peptides generated after proteolysis will cover the proteome space orthogonal to that of tryptic peptides both in a quantitative and qualitative manner [@PMID:24290761; @PMID:22669647; @PMID:24696503]

Clostripain, commonly known as Arg-C, is a cysteine protease obtained from _Clostridium histolyticum_ [@PMID:4332560].
It hydrolyses mostly the C-terminal Arg residues and sometimes Lys residues, but with less efficiency.
The peptides generated are generally longer than that of tryptic peptides.
Arg-C is often used with other proteases for improving qualitative proteome data and also for investigating PTMs [@PMID:25823410]. 

LysargiNase, also known as Ulilysin, is a recently discovered protease belonging to the metalloprotease family. 
It is a thermophilic protease derived from _Methanosarcina acetivorans_ that specifically cleaves at the N-terminus of Lys and Arg residues [@PMID:25419962].
Hence, it enabled discovery of C-terminal peptides that were not observed using trypsin.
In addition, it can also cleave modified amino acids such as methylated or dimethylated Arg and Lys [@PMID:25419962].

Peptidyl-Lys metalloendopeptidase, or Lys-N, is an metalloprotease obtained from _Grifola frondosa_ [@PMID:19195997]. 
It cleaves N-terminally of Lys and has an optimal activity at pH 9.0.
Unlike trypsin, Lys-N is more resistant to denaturing agents and can be heated up to 70°C [@PMID:25823410].
Peptides generated from Lys-N digestion produce more c-type ions using ETD fragmentation [@PMID:18425140]. 
Hence this can be used for analysing PTMs, identification of C-terminal peptides and also for _de novo_ sequencing strategies [@PMID:18425140; @PMID:20953479].

Pepsin A, commonly known as pepsin, is an aspartic protease obtained from bovine or porcine pancreas [@PMID:12089768].
Pepsin was one of several proteins crystalized by John Northrop, who shared the 1946 Nobel prize in chemistry for this work [@PMID:19872561;@PMID:19872562; @PMID:17758437;@URL:https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/1946/speedread].
Pepsin works at an optimum pH range from 1 to 4 and specifically cleaves Trp, Phe, Tyr and  Leu [@PMID:25823410]. 
Since it possess high enzyme activity and broad specificity at lower pH, it is preferred over other proteases for MS-based disulphide mapping [@PMID:12476442; @PMID:24980484].
Pepsin is also used extensively for structural mass spectrometry studies with hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX) because the rate of back exchange of the amide deuteron is minimized at low pH [@DOI:10.1021/ac902477u; @DOI:10.1002/mas.21565].  
 
Proteinase K was first isolated from the mold _Tritirachium album_ Limber [@PMID:4373242]. 
The epithet 'K' is derived from its ability to efficiently hydrolyze keratin [@PMID:4373242].
It is a member of the subtilisin family of proteases and is relatively unspecific with a preference for proteolysis at hydrophobic and aromatic amino acid residues [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-382219-2.00714-6]. 
The optimal enzyme activity is between pH 7.5 and 12.
Proteinase K is used at low concentrations for limited proteolysis (LiP) and the detection of protein structural changes in the eponymous technique LiP-MS [@PMID:29072706]. 

### Peptide quantitation assays
After peptide production from proteomes, it may be desirable to quantify the peptide yield. 
Quantitation of peptide assays is not as easy as protein lysate assays. 
BCA protein assays perform poorly with peptide solutions and report erroneous values. 
A simplistic measurement is to use a nanodrop device, but absorbance measurements from a drop of solution does not report accurate values either. 
Especially given that low amounts of peptides are often produced for proteomics, more sensitive methods based on fluorescence are prefered. 
One reliable approach is to Fluorescamine based assay for peptide solutions for higher accuracy [@PMID:5085985; @PMID:11673879]. 
This assay is based on the reaction between a labeling reagent and the N-terminal primary amine in the peptide(s); therefore, samples must be free of amine-containing buffers (e.g., Tris-based buffer and/or amino acids).
This procedure has performance similar to the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Cat 23290).
A second option is also easy to use tryptophan fluorescence to quantify peptide yields [@DOI:10.1021/ac504689z], which is useful because it does not consume the sample because it uses intrinsic fluorescence. 


