## Peptide Quantification {.page_break_before}
<!-- todo: change the label of this file eventually to peptide quant instead of peptide labeling
 -->
Discussion of methods to isotopically label peptides or proteins that enable quantification

1. SILAC/SILAM
2. dimethyl labeling
3. Isobaric tags

### Peptide labeling with isobaric tags
The isobaric tag labeling-based quantitation uses derivatization of every peptide sample with a different isotope from a set of isobaric mass tags. 
This is followed by pooling the labelled samples, which undergo MS analysis simultaneously. 
As the isobaric tags are used, peptides labeled with these tags give a single MS peak with the same precursor m/z value in an MS1 scan and identical retention time of liquid chromatography analysis. 
The modified parent ions undergo fragmentation during MS/MS analysis generating two kinds of fragment ions: (a) reporter ions and (b) peptide fragment ions. 
The reporter ions’ relative intensity is directly proportional to the amount of peptide in each of the starting samples that were mixed. 
The fragment ion peaks with higher m/z values correspond to amino acid sequences of peptides and are used for identifying peptides, from which proteins can be inferred. 
Since it is possible to label most tryptic peptide with an isobaric mass tag at least at the n-termini, numerous peptides from the same protein can be detected, thus leading to an increase in the confidence in both protein identification and quantification [@PMID:25337643]. 
All isobaric tags have a common structural theme consisting of 1) an amine-reactive groups (usually triazine ester or N-hydroxysuccinimide [NHS] esters) which react with peptide N-termini and ε-amino group of the lysine side chain of peptides, 2) a balancer group, and 3) a reporter ion group.  

Because the size of the reporter ions is small and sometimes the mass difference between reporter ions is small, these methods are mostly used with high-resolution mass measurement, not with classical ion traps [@PMID:26584918]. 
There are examples, however, of using isobaric tags with pulsed q dissociation on linear ion traps (LTQs) [@PMID:22397766]. 
Suitable instruments are the Thermo Q-Exactive, Exploris lines, and Tribrid lines, or TOFs such as the TripleTOF or timsTOFs [@DOI:10.1038/s41467-022-34919-w; @PMID:30967486]. 

<!-- todo: put the isobaric tagging figure Rex made here and refer to it -->

The following are some of the isobaric labeling techniques:

#### isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ)
The iTRAQ tagging method covalently labels the peptide N-terminus and side-chain primary amines with tags of different masses through the NHS-ester bond. 
This is followed by mass spectrometry analysis [@PMID:15385600]. 
Reporter ions for an 8plex iTRAQ are measured at roughly 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, and 121 Thompsons. 
At the moment, two kinds of iTRAQ reagents are available: 4-plex and 8-plex. 
Using 4-plex reagents, a maximum of four different biological conditions can be analyzed simultaneously, whereas using 8plex reagents, eight different biological conditions can be analysed [@PMID:20593797; @PMID:22594965].

#### iTRAQ hydrazide (iTRAQH)
iTRAQH is an isobaric tagging reagent for the selective labeling and relative quantification of carbonyl (CO) groups in proteins [@PMID:22926130]. 
The reactive CO and oxygen groups which are generated as the byproducts of oxidation of lipids at the time of oxidative stress causes protein carbonylation [@PMID:15775985]. 
iTRAQH is produced from iTRAQ and surplus of hydrazine. 
This reagent reacts with peptides which are carbonylated, thus forming a hydrazone group. 
iTRAQH is a novel method for analyzing carbonylation sites in proteins utilizing an isobaric tag for absolute and relative quantitation iTRAQ derivative, iTRAQH, and the analytical power of linear ion trap instruments (QqLIT). 
This new strategy seems to be well suited for quantifying carbonylation at large scales because it avoids time-consuming enrichment procedures [@PMID:22926130]. 
Thus, there is no need for enriching modified peptides before LC-MS/MS analysis.

#### Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)
TMT labeling is based on a similar principle as that of iTRAQ. 
In the case of 6-plex-TMT, the masses of reporter groups are roughly 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, and 131 Thompsons [@PMID:26584918]. 
TMT works best with MS which allow quantitation at MS3-level with higher accuracy (e.g.: Thermo’s Fusion Orbitrap instruments) [@PMID:25337643] and its eliminates ratio distortion in isobaric multiplexed quantitative proteomics [@PMID:21963607]. 
The TMT is widely used for quantitative protein biomarker discovery. 
In addition, TMT labeling technique helps multiplex sample analysis enabling efficient use of instrument time. 
TMT labelling also controls for technical variation because after samples are mixed the ratios are locked in, and any sample loss would be equal across channels. 
A wide range of TMT reagents with different multiplexing capabilities are available, such as TMT zero, TMT duplex, TMT six plex, TMT 10-plex, and TMT 11-plex are available along with the recent addition of TMT 16-plex and now even TMT 18-plex [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00168]. 
These TMT reagents have a similar chemical structure, which allows the efficient transition from method development to multiplex quantification [@PMID:30967486].

#### iodoTMT
IodoTMT reagents are isobaric reagents used for tagging cysteine residues of peptides. 
The commercially available IodoTMT reagents are iodoTMTzero and iodoTMT 6-plex [@PMID:24152285; @PMID:24926564].

#### aminoxyTMT Isobaric Mass Tags
Also referred to as glyco-TMTs, these reagents have chemistry similar to iTRAQH. 
The stable isotope-labeled glyco-TMTs are utilized for quantitating N-linked glycans. 
They are derived from the original TMT reagents with an addition of carbonyl-reactive groups, which involve either hydrazide or aminoxy chemistry as functional groups. 
These aminooxy TMTs show a better performance as compared to its iTRAQH counterparts in terms of efficiency of labeling and quantification. 
The glyco-TMT compounds consist of stable isotopes thus enabling (i) isobaric quantification using MS/MS spectra and (ii) quantification in MS1 spectra using heavy/light pairs. 
Aminoxy TMT6-128 and TMT6-131 along with the hydrazide TMT2-126 and TMT2-127 reagents can be used for isobaric quantification. 
In the quantification at MS1 level, the light TMT0 and the heavy TMT6 reagents have a difference in mass of 5.0105 Da which is sufficient to separate the isotopic patterns of all common N-glycans. 
Glycan quantification based on glyco-TMTs generates more accurate quantification in MS1 spectra over a broad dynamic range. 
Intact proteins or their digests obtained from biological samples are treated with PNGase F/A glycosidases to release the N-linked glycans during the process of labeling using aminoxyTMT reagents. 
The free glycans are then purified and labeled with the aminoxyTMT reagent at the reducing end. 
The labeled glycans from individual samples are subsequently pooled and then undergo analysis in MS for identification of glycoforms in the sample and quantification of relative abundance of reporter ions at MS/MS level [@PMID:22455665].

#### N,N-Dimethyl leucine (DiLeu)
The N,N-Dimethyl leucine, also referred to as DiLeu, is an tandem mass tag reagent which is isobaric and has reporter ions of isotope-encoded dimethylated leucine [@PMID:20218596]. 
Each incorporated label produces a 145.1 Da mass shift. 
A maximum of four samples can be simultaneously analyzed using DiLeu at a highly reduced cost. 
MS/MS analysis shows intense reporter ions i.e., dimethylated leucine a1 ions at 115, 116, 117, and 118 m/z. 
The DiLeu tag labeling efficiency is similar to that of the iTRAQ. 
Although, DiLeu-labeled peptides offer increased confidence for identification of peptides and more reliable quantification as they undergo better fragmentation thus generating higher reporter ion intensities [@PMID:20218596].

#### Deuterium isobaric Amine Reactive Tag (DiART)
DiART is an isobaric tagging method used in quantitative proteomics [@PMID:22404494; @PMID:20715779]. 
The reporter group in DiART tags is a N,N′-dimethyl leucine reporter group with a mass to charge range of 114–119. DiART reagents can a label a maximum of six samples and further analyzed by MS. 
The isotope purity of DiART reagents is very high hence correction of isotopic impurities is not needed at the time of data analysis [@PMID:20019052]. 
The performances of DiART including the mechanism of fragmentation, the number of proteins identified and the quantification accuracy are similar to iTRAQ. 
Irrespective of the sequence of the peptide, reporter ions of high-intensity are produced by DiART tags in comparison to those with iTRAQ and thus, DiART labeling can be used to quantify more peptides as well as those with lower abundance, and with reliable results [@PMID:22404494]. 
DiART serves as a cheaper alternative to TMT and iTRAQ while also having a comparable labeling efficiency. 
It has been observed that these tags are useful in labeling huge protein quantities from cell lysates before TiO2 enrichment in quantitative phosphoproteomics studies [@PMID:24129742].


<!-- todo: not sure if this is the best place for this figure about quantification strategies, do we need a whole section on quant? -->

![**Quantitative strategies commonly used in proteomics.**
A) Label-free quantitation. 
Proteins are extracted from samples, enzymatically hydrolyzed into peptides and analyzed by mass spectrometry.
Chromatographic peak areas from peptides are compared across samples that are analyzed sequentially. 
B) Metabolic labelling. 
Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) is based on feeding cells stable isotope labeled amino acids (“light” or “heavy”). 
Samples grown with heavy or light amino acids are mixed before cell lysis.
The relative intensities of the heavy and light peptide are used to compute protein changes between samples.
C) Isobaric or chemical labelling. 
Proteins are isolated separately from samples, enzymatically hydrolyzed into peptides, and then chemically tagged with isobaric stable isotope labels. 
These isobaric tags produce unique reporter mass-to-charge (m/z) signals that are produced upon fragmentation with MS/MS. 
Peptide fragment ions are used to identify peptides, and the relative reporter ion signals are used for quantification.
](images/Summay_peptide-protein-labeling_.svg){#fig:quant-summary tag="2" width="100%"}


