## 5. Peptide Quantification {.page_break_before}

### Label-free quantification (LFQ) of peptides
LFQ of peptide precursors requires no additional steps in the protein extraction, digestion, and peptide purification workflow (**Figure 3**). 
Samples can be taken straight to the mass spectrometer and are injected one at a time, each sample necessitating their own LC-MS/MS experiment and raw file. 
Quantification of peptides by LFQ is routinely performed by many commercial and freely available proteomics software (see Data Analysis section below). 
In LFQ, peptide abundances across LC-MS/MS experiments are usually calculated by computing the area under the extracted ion chromatograms for signals that are specific to each peptide; this involves aligning windows of accurate peptide mass and retention time.
LFQ can be performed using precursor MS1 signals from DDA, or using multiple fragment ion signals from DIA (see Data Acquisition section).
It is important to note that due to differences in peptide ionization efficiency, LFQ only provides relative quantification, not absolute quantities. 

![**Quantitative strategies commonly used in proteomics.**
A few non-comprehensive examples are of quantification methods are shown. A) Label-free quantification. 
Proteins are extracted from samples, enzymatically hydrolyzed into peptides and analyzed by mass spectrometry.
Extracted ion chromatograms from peptides are compared across samples that are analyzed sequentially. 
B) Metabolic labelling. 
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) is based on feeding cells stable isotope labeled amino acids (“light” or “heavy”). 
Samples grown with heavy or light amino acids are mixed before cell lysis.
The relative intensities of the heavy and light peptide are used to compute protein differences between samples.
C) Isobaric or chemical labelling. 
Proteins are isolated separately from samples, enzymatically hydrolyzed into peptides, and then chemically tagged with isobaric stable isotope labels. 
These isobaric tags produce unique reporter mass-to-charge (*m/z*) signals that are produced upon fragmentation with MS/MS. 
Peptide fragment ions are used to identify peptides, and the relative reporter ion signals are used for quantification.
](images/Summay_peptide-protein-labeling_.svg){#fig:quant-summary tag="3" width="100%"}

### Stable isotope labeling of peptides
One approach to improve the throughput and quantitative completeness within a group of samples is sample multiplexing via stable isotope labeling.
Multiplexing enables pooling of samples and parallel LC-MS/MS analysis within one run.
Quantification can be achieved at the MS1- or MSn-level, dictated by the upstream labeling strategy.

Stable isotope labeling methods produce peptides that are chemically identical from each sample that differ only in their mass. 
Methods include stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.m200025-mcp200] and chemical labeling such as amine-modifying tags for relative and absolute quantification (mTRAQ) [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M111.014423] or dimethyl labeling [@PMID:19300442].
The latter two methods are chemical labeling processes after proteome or peptide purification. 
In all these aproaches, the labeling of each sample imparts mass shifts (e.g. 4 Da, 8 Da) which can be detected within the MS1 full scan.
The ability to label samples in cell culture has enabled impactful quantitative biology experiments [@DOI:10.1016/j.celrep.2013.01.003; @DOI:10.1038/nmeth.1647].
These approaches have nearly exclusively been performed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) strategies. 
However, recent work employing faster instrumentation has shown the benefits of chemical labeling with 3-plex mTRAQ or dimethyl labels for data-independent acquisition (DIA) [@DOI:10.1038/s41587-022-01389-w; @DOI:10.15252/msb.202211503], an idea originally developed nearly a decade earlier using chemical labels to quantify lysine acetylation and succinylation stoichiometry [@DOI:10.1007/s13361-016-1476-z]. 
As new tags with higher plexing become available, strategies like plexDIA and mDIA are sure to benefit [@DOI:10.1038/s41587-022-01389-w; @DOI:10.15252/msb.202211503].

### Peptide labeling with isobaric tags
Another approach is multiplexing via isobaric labels, a strategy which enables parallel data acquisition after pooling of samples. 
Commercial isobaric tags include tandem mass tags (TMT) [@DOI:10.1021/ac0262560] and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M400129-MCP200] amongst others, and several non-commercial options have also been developed [@DOI:10.1021/ac902778d]. 
Although isobaric tags enable collection of data from many samples at once, to improve depth, fractionation by high pH reversed phase is often used, which limits the benefit in throughput. 

The isobaric tag labeling-based peptide quantitation strategy uses derivatization of every peptide sample with a different isotopic incorporation from a set of isobaric mass tags. 
All isobaric tags have a common structural theme consisting of 1) an amine-reactive groups (usually triazine ester or N-hydroxysuccinimide [NHS] esters) which react with peptide N-termini and ε-amino group of the lysine side chain of peptides, 2) a balancer group, and 3) a reporter ion group (**Figure 4**).  

Peptide labeling is followed by pooling the labelled samples, which undergo MS and MS/MS analysis. 
Often the pooled samples are fractionated into multiple samples to increase the depth.
As the isobaric tags are used, peptides labeled with these tags give a single MS peak with the same precursor *m/z* value in an MS1 scan and identical retention time of liquid chromatography analysis. 
The modified parent ions undergo fragmentation during MS/MS analysis generating two kinds of fragment ions: (a) reporter ions and (b) peptide fragment ions. 
Each reporter ions’ relative intensity is directly proportional to the peptide abundance in each of the starting samples that were pooled. 
As usual, b- and y-type fragment ion peaks are still used to identify amino acid sequences of peptides, from which proteins can be inferred. 
Since it is possible to label most tryptic peptides with an isobaric mass tag at least at the N-termini, numerous peptides from the same protein can be detected and quantified, thus leading to an increase in the confidence in both protein identification and quantification [@PMID:25337643, @DOI:10.1146/annurev-biodatasci-080917-013516]. 

Because the size of the reporter ions is small and sometimes the mass difference between reporter ions is small (i.e., a ~6 mDa difference when using 13C versus 15N), these methods almost exclusively employ high-resolution mass analyzers, not classical ion traps [@PMID:26584918]. 
There are examples, however, of using isobaric tags with pulsed q dissociation on linear ion traps (LTQs) [@PMID:22397766]. 
Suitable instruments are the Thermo Q-Exactive, Exploris, Tribrid, and Astral lines, or Q-TOFs such as the TripleTOF or timsTOF platforms [@DOI:10.1038/s41467-022-34919-w; @PMID:30967486]. 

![**Chemical structure of isobaric tags.**
This shows the TMT 6-plex from ThermoFisher, which is an example of an isobaric tag. 
The structure has three elements, the reactive group (in this case N-hydroy-succinimide), the balancer, and the reporter.
The reactive group enables quick covalent conjugation to nucleophic amines found at peptide n-termimi and lysine side chains. 
The balance and reporter groups together contain a total of six heavy isotopes. 
The stars in the structures indicate the positions of all six heavy atoms for each TMT form. 
For this reason, a sample labeled by the any version will have the same precursor mass. 
However, upon fragmentation, the balance group is lost and the reporter retains a charge.
The reporter group is measured in the low mass region and is proportional to the starting amount of each sample before mixing
This ratio of reporter signals enables quantification. 
](images/TMT_Figure.png){#fig:DIA-types tag="4" width="100%"}

The following are some of the isobaric labeling techniques:

#### isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ)
The iTRAQ tagging method covalently labels the peptide N-terminus and side-chain primary amines with tags of different masses through the NHS-ester bond. 
This was the first isobaric tagging method to find widespread use, but it isn't used as much anymore. 
This is followed by mass spectrometry analysis [@PMID:15385600]. 
Reporter ions for an 8-plex iTRAQ are measured at nominally 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, and 121 m/z. 
Currently, two kinds of iTRAQ reagents are available: 4-plex and 8-plex [@DOI:10.1007/978-1-4939-3106-4_18]. 
Using 4-plex reagents, a maximum of four different biological conditions can be analyzed simultaneously (i.e., multiplexed), whereas using 8-plex reagents enables the simultaneous analysis of eight different biological conditions [@PMID:20593797; @PMID:22594965].

#### iTRAQ hydrazide (iTRAQH)
iTRAQH is an isobaric tagging reagent for the selective labeling and relative quantification of carbonyl (CO) groups in proteins [@PMID:22926130]. 
The reactive CO and oxygen groups which are generated as the byproducts of oxidation of lipids at the time of oxidative stress causes protein carbonylation [@PMID:15775985]. 
iTRAQH is produced from iTRAQ and surplus of hydrazine. 
This reagent reacts with peptides which are carbonylated, thus forming a hydrazone group. 
iTRAQH is a novel method for analyzing carbonylation sites in proteins utilizing an isobaric tag for absolute and relative quantitation iTRAQ derivative, iTRAQH, and the analytical power of linear ion trap instruments (QqLIT). 
This new strategy seems to be well suited for quantifying carbonylation at large scales because it avoids time-consuming enrichment procedures [@PMID:22926130]. 
Thus, there is no need for enriching modified peptides before LC-MS/MS analysis.

#### Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)
TMT labeling is based on a similar principle as that of iTRAQ. 
The TMT label is based on a glycine backbone and this limits the amount of sites for heavy atom incorporation
In the case of 6-plex-TMT, the masses of reporter groups are nominally 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, and 131 Da [@PMID:26584918]. 
10- and 11-plex TMT kits were recently supplanted by proline-based TMT tags (TMTpro), originally introduced as 16-plex kits in 2019 [@DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.9b04474] and upgraded to an 18-plex platform in 2021 [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00168]. 
Due to co-isolation of multiple precursors leading to reporter ion compression, TMT works best with MS platforms which allow quantitation at the MS3 level (e.g., Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Tribrid instruments) [@PMID:25337643; @DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.3c01155].
In experiments performed on Q-Orbitrap or Q-TOF platforms, MS2-based sequence identification (via b- and y-type ions) and quantitation (via low m/z reporter ion intensities) is performed.
In experiments performed on Q-Orbitrap-LIT platfroms, MS3-based quantitation can be performed wherein the top ~10 most abundant b- and y-type ions are synchronously co-isolated in the linear ion trap and fragmented once more before product ions are scanned out in the Orbitrap mass analzer.
Adding an additional layer of gas-phase purification limits the ratio distortion of co-isolated precursors within isobaric multiplexed quantitative proteomics [@PMID:21963607; @DOI:10.1021/ac502040v].
Infrared photoactivation of co-isolated TMT fragment ions generates more quantitative reporter ion generation and sensitivity relative to standard beam-type collisional activation [@DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.1c05398].
High-field asymmetric waveform spectrometry (FAIMS) also aids the accuracy of TMT-based quantitation on Tribrid systems [@DOI:https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.8b05399].
TMT is widely used for quantitative protein biomarker discovery. 
In addition, TMT labeling technique helps multiplex sample analysis enabling efficient use of instrument time. 
TMT labelling also controls for technical variation because after samples are mixed the ratios are locked in, and any sample loss would be equal across channels. 
A wide range of TMT reagents with different multiplexing capabilities are available, such as TMT zero, TMT duplex, TMT 6-plex, TMT 10-plex, and TMT 11-plex. 
The recent addition of TMTpro tags, slight adaptations of the TMT structure based on proline, allow for higher plexing with TMTpro 16-plex [@DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.9b04474] and now TMTpro 18-plex [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00168]. 
These TMT reagents have a similar chemical structure, which allows the efficient transition from method development to multiplexed peptide quantification [@PMID:30967486].

#### iodoTMT
IodoTMT reagents are isobaric reagents used for tagging cysteine residues of peptides. 
The commercially available IodoTMT reagents are iodoTMTzero and iodoTMT 6-plex [@PMID:24152285; @PMID:24926564]. 
These reagents are useful for studies of cysteine oxidation modifications because only unoxidized cysteine is modified. 

#### aminoxyTMT Isobaric Mass Tags
Also referred to as glyco-TMTs, these reagents have chemistry similar to iTRAQH. 
The stable isotope-labeled glyco-TMTs are utilized for quantitating N-linked glycans. 
They are derived from the original TMT reagents with an addition of carbonyl-reactive groups, which involve either hydrazide or aminoxy chemistry as functional groups. 
These aminoxy TMTs show a better performance as compared to its iTRAQH counterparts in terms of efficiency of labeling and quantification. 
The glyco-TMT compounds consist of stable isotopes thus enabling (i) isobaric quantification using MS/MS spectra and (ii) quantification in MS1 spectra using heavy/light pairs. 
Aminoxy TMT6-128 and TMT6-131 along with the hydrazide TMT2-126 and TMT2-127 reagents can be used for isobaric quantification. 
In the quantification at MS1 level, the light TMT0 and the heavy TMT6 reagents have a difference in mass of 5.0105 Da which is sufficient to separate the isotopic patterns of all common N-glycans. 
Glycan quantification based on glyco-TMTs generates more accurate quantification in MS1 spectra over a broad dynamic range. 
Intact proteins or their digests obtained from biological samples are treated with PNGase F/A glycosidases to release the N-linked glycans during the process of labeling using aminoxyTMT reagents. 
The free glycans are then purified and labeled with the aminoxyTMT reagent at the reducing end. 
The labeled glycans from individual samples are subsequently pooled and then undergo analysis in MS for identification of glycoforms in the sample and quantification of relative abundance of reporter ions at MS/MS level [@PMID:22455665].

#### N,N-Dimethyl leucine (DiLeu)
The N,N-Dimethyl leucine, also referred to as DiLeu, is an tandem mass tag reagent which is isobaric and has reporter ions of isotope-encoded dimethylated leucine [@PMID:20218596]. 
Each incorporated label produces a 145.1 Da mass shift. 
A maximum of four samples can be simultaneously analyzed using DiLeu at a highly reduced cost. 
MS/MS analysis shows intense reporter ions i.e., dimethylated leucine a1 ions at 115, 116, 117, and 118 *m/z*. 
The labeling efficiency of DiLeu tags are similar to that of the iTRAQ tags. 
Although, DiLeu-labeled peptides offer increased confidence of identification of peptides and more reliable quantification as they undergo better fragmentation, generating higher reporter ion intensities [@PMID:20218596].

#### Deuterium isobaric Amine Reactive Tag (DiART)
DiART is an isobaric tagging method used in quantitative proteomics [@PMID:22404494; @PMID:20715779]. 
The reporter group in DiART tags is a N,N′-dimethyl leucine reporter group with a mass to charge range of 114–119. DiART reagents can a label a maximum of six samples and further analyzed by MS. 
The isotope purity of DiART reagents is very high hence correction of isotopic impurities is not needed at the time of data analysis [@PMID:20019052]. 
The performances of DiART including the mechanism of fragmentation, the number of proteins identified and the quantification accuracy are similar to iTRAQ. 
Irrespective of the sequence of the peptide, reporter ions of high-intensity are produced by DiART tags in comparison to those with iTRAQ and thus, DiART labeling can be used to quantify more peptides as well as those with lower abundance, and with reliable results [@PMID:22404494]. 
DiART serves as a cheaper alternative to TMT and iTRAQ while also having a comparable labeling efficiency. 
It has been observed that these tags are useful in labeling huge protein quantities from cell lysates before TiO2 enrichment in quantitative phosphoproteomics studies [@PMID:24129742].

#### Hyperplexing or higher-order multiplexing
Some studies have combined metabolic labels (i.e., SILAC) with chemical tags (i.e., iTRAQ or TMT) to expand the multiplexing capacity of proteomics experiments referred to as hyperplexing [@DOI:10.1126/scisignal.2002548; @DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.3c00906] or higher order multiplexing [@PMID:31074990; @PMID:32455206; @PMID:36854207]. 
This technique combines MS1- and MS2-based quantitative methods to achieve enhanced multiplexing by multiplying the channels used in each dimension. 
This allows for the quantitation of proteomes across multiple samples in a single MS run. 
The technique uses two types of mass encoding to label different biological samples. 
The labeled samples are then mixed together, which increases the MS1 peptide signal. 
Protein turnover rates were studied using SILAC-iTRAQ multitagging [@DOI:10.1021/pr9007738], while various combined precursor isotopic labeling and isobaric tagging (cPILOT) studies employed MS1 dimethyl labeling with iTRAQ [@PMID:25588721; @PMID:25620666; @PMID:24124127; @PMID:27152368]. 
SILAC-TMT hyperplexing was used to study the temporal response to rapamycin in yeast [@PMID:22457332]. 
SILAC-iTRAQ-TAILS method was developed to study matrix metalloproteinases in the secretomes of keratinocytes and fibroblasts [@PMID:25871442]. 
TMT-SILAC hyperplexing was used to study synthesis and degradation rates in human fibroblasts [@PMID:27765818]. 
Variants of SILAC-iTRAQ and BONCAT, namely BONPlex [@PMID:27672675] and MITNCAT [@PMID:30466063] were also developed to study temporal proteome dynamics.
