## 7. Peptide Purification and Fractionation {.page_break_before}

### Peptide purification methods
Before peptide analysis, interferences from sample preparation must be removed. 
There are several approaches to purify peptides. 

#### Solid phase extraction (SPE)
Solid phase extraction (SPE) is a common MS-based proteomics technique employed in the sample preparation. 
In this method, compound isolation is based on chemical and physical properties, which determines the distribution of compounds between a mobile phase (liquid) and a stationary phase (solid). 
After the molecules bind, washing of the bound compounds is performed and then molecules are made to elute from the stationary phase after replacing the mobile phase with the elution buffer. 
The material used for SPE is usually discarded after every sample and no gradient is applied for elution (single-step procedure of elution) [@PMID:14697044]. 
Thus, using SPE only a specific analyte group gets separated, which depends on the stationary phase. 
Hence, SPE is primarily used for sample clean-up and for reducing complexity of the sample. 
For MS-based proteomic analysis, it is largely used to get rid of salts and other contaminants that might lead to ion suppression. 
The major drawback of this technique is that with SPE only a small fraction of the sample is examined because not all compounds are captured, but only those with binding capabilities same as that of the sorbent. 
The material for SPE is available in various types, including (micro-) columns, cartridges, plates, micropipette tips, and functionalized magnetic beads (MBs) [@PMID:20606758; @PMID:20099258]. 
Reversed-phase is the most widely used material for SPE in proteomic studies for the proteins and peptide fractionation and rarely, ion-exchange material. 
For the separation of glycosylated proteins and peptides, the preferred material is normal phase such as HILIC [@PMID:22665312; @PMID:20536156]. 
SPE materials which are less commonly used are silica- or polystyrene-based ones [@PMID:17625912; @PMID:15317408]. 
The other types of SPE methods are IEX, metal chelation, and affinity-based [@PMID:25692071].

The basic idea behind the choice of binding and wash versus elution solutions for SPE is that that the binding and wash solutions should favor the interaction between the analytes of interest and the solid phase, whereas the elution solution should favor the interaction of the analyte with the liquid phase (**Figure 5**). 
For example, with reversed phase SPE, the solid phase is C18 or some other hydrophobic chemistry. 
Binding of peptides to this solid phase is based on the hydrophobicity of peptides, mostly due to the presence of hydrophobic amino acid side chains; leucine is the most common amino acid in human proteins. 
To encourage peptides to ‘like’ the stationary phase more than the liquid phase, the peptides are loaded in aqueous solution. 
This will enable washing of the hydrophilic contaminants like salts, small polar buffer molecules, and polar denaturants like urea. 
After washing the bound peptides, they can be eluted by switching the liquid phase to something hydrophobic, which allows the peptides to partition more into the liquid phase and elute from the solid phase.

![**Solid phase extraction (SPE).**
SPE is a sample preparation technique that uses a solid adsorbent contained most commonly in a cartridge device to selectively adsorb certain molecules from solution. 
The first step is the conditioning of the cartridge which involves wetting the adsorbent to solvate its functional groups and filling the void spaces with solvent thereby removing any air in the column. 
This is necessary to produce a suitable environment for adsorption and thus ensure reproducible interaction with the analytes. 
After conditioning, the sample is loaded in the cartridge. 
This can be performed with the aid of positive or negative pressure to ensure a constant flow rate. 
In this step molecules bind the adsorbent and interferences pass through. 
Next, the column is washed with the mobile phase to eliminate the contaminants while ensuring the analyte remains bound. 
Finally, peptides are eluted in an appropriate buffer solution with polarity or charge that competes with interaction with the solid phase. 
](images/SPE_v05.png){#fig:SPE tag="5" width="100%"}

#### Specific Types of peptide purification
There are many additional peptide purification methods that are commonly used in proteomics currently. 
These methods include the following:

1. StageTips, in-stagetip (iST) [@DOI:10.1021/ac026117i; @DOI:10.1038/nmeth.2834]
2. SP2 or SP3 [@PMID:32129943]
3. Suspension trapping (S-trap) [@DOI:10.1002/pmic.201300553]

### Peptide fractionation methods
The number of peptides produced from proteolysis of the whole proteome is immense. 
Thus, after peptides are cleaned from interferences, they are often fractionated into subsets to enable increased proteome coverage. 
The characterization of the whole proteome is expected from higher order organisms, and with rising interest in post-translational modifications, an elaborate coverage of protein sequence is required. 
There are different methods for peptide fractionation as follows:

#### Ion-exchange chromatography (IEC)
This method involves the separation based on contrasting electric charge [@PMID:27868236]. 
In this approach, the mechanism of analyte retention is based on the principle of electrostatic attraction between the sample and the stationary phase functional groups (FGs), having opposite charges. 
IEC is classified into two types: cation-exchange and anion-exchange chromatography. 
In cation-exchange chromatography, at an acidic pH, the negatively charged functional groups such as sulfates are attracted to positively charged peptides, whereas, in anion-exchange chromatography, positively charged FGs such as quaternary ammoniums are attracted to peptides with negative charge at an alkaline pH. 
These techniques are further classified into: strong (cation [SCX] and anion [SAX] exchange), and weak exchangers (cation [WCX] and anion [WAX] exchange), based on the type of FG attached [@PMID:35777803]. 
These functional groups are most commonly supported in resins made up of silica and synthetic polymers, however, some inorganic materials are sometimes used [@PMID:27868236]. 
In the IEC method, peptide elution is performed using a mobile phase with higher ionic strength, to ensure peptide partition into the liquid phase. SCX along with a salt gradient/plug is a routinely used proteomics technique. 
In the SCX method, peptides are resolved according to their net charge, in which the peptide with the lowest positive charge is eluted first. 
Increasing the salt concentration decreases the peptide retention time due to competition with the electrostatic interactions between the peptides and the solid phase. 
However, SCX resolution is limited compared to reversed phase chromatography and will thus limit the suitability of this technique for complex mixtures [@PMID:15672457].

#### Reversed-phase chromatography (RPLC)
Reversed-phase chromatography is the most commonly used chromatographic technique which separates molecules in solution having neutral pH based on their hydrophobicity. 
The separation occurs on the basis of the partition coefficient of analytes between the mobile phase and the hydrophobic stationary phase. 
Highly polar peptides elute before the ones having less polarity because of the strong interaction with the hydrophobic functional groups forming a layer similar to a liquid around the silica resin [@PMID:20973639]. 
RPLC has been widely used in separation of peptides because of its compatibility with gradient elution and aqueous samples and its retention mechanism, which modulates separation owing to changes in the properties like pH, additives and organic modifier [@PMID:20031138]. 
Numerous factors influence the capacity of chromatographic peaks, such as temperature, column length, stationary phase, particle size, mobile-phase ion-pairing reagent, mobile-phase modifier and gradient slope[@PMID:16224963]. 
Usually online RPLC is done at acidic pH to ensure peptide ionization, but it can be paired with offline high pH RPLC and multiple fraction concatenation to produce orthogonal separation due to altered ionization of amino acids changing peptide hydrophobicity [@PMID:22462785].

#### Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC)
Inverse-gradient chromatography was the forerunner to HILIC [@PMID:3569294] 
HILIC is similar in its principle to normal-phase chromatography where the stationary phase is polar and the intitial solvent conditions are nonpolar. 
Gradient elution in HILIC is accomplished by increasing the polarity of the mobile phase, by decreasing the concentration of organic solvent, i.e., in the “opposite” direction compared to RPLC separations. 
With charged HILIC stationary phases there is also a possibility of increasing the salt or buffer concentration during a gradient to disrupt electrostatic interactions with the solute [@PMID:18264818; @PMID:15459207]. 
Thus, the peptides with less polarity elute before the more polar peptides. 
It is used for the separation of hydrophilic peptides and polar analytes [@PMID:21879300]. 
This separation is achieved by a stationary phase that is hydrophilic in nature, for example: cyano-, diol-, amino- bonded phases [@PMID:18428181], and an organic and hydrophobic mobile phase [@PMID:18264818]. 
HILIC can also be used for enrichment and targeted proteomic analysis of PTMs, such as glycosylation, N-acetylation and phosphorylation, which increase the polarity of peptides and therefore also their retention on HILIC [@PMID:20973639].

#### Electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction chromatography (ERLIC)
ERLIC is a method based on use of a weak anion exchange column operated at low pH with high organic solvent enabling isocratic elution [@DOI:10.1021/ac070997p]. 
Acidic peptides are retained by electrostatic interaction, basic and neutral peptides are retained through hydrophilic interaction made favorable by high organic solvent. 
This improves retention of acidic peptides and reduces retention of basic peptides compared to normal HILIC [@DOI:10.1021/pr100037h]. 

#### Isoelectric focusing (IEF)
IEF is a type of high-resolution (HR) technique of electrophoresis used for the separation as well as concentration of peptides that are amphoteric in nature on the basis of their isoelectric point (pI) using a solution without buffer consisting of either carrier ampholytes or a gel with immobilized pH gradient (IPG). 
After IEF separation, the separated amphoteric peptides in the liquid phase are recovered for further analysis by RPLC-MS/MS [@PMID:16849286]. 
Along with being a technique with improved resolution and capacity, for separation of peptides, IEF provides with additional information on physicochemical properties of the peptides, for example: peptide iso electric point (pI) which acts as a tool for validation and filtration for identifying MS/MS peptide sequence during the step of database search [@PMID:18851748]. 
The IEF system is not only used for increasing the coverage of proteome but also in quantitative label-free [@PMID:17708596] and stable isobaric labeling experiments [@PMID:18851748]. 
IEF and gel-based separations have fallen out of favor in the last decade due to improvements in liquid chromatography. 
