## Peptide Ionization {.page_break_before}
Until the early 1990s, peptides analysis by mass spectrometry was challenging. 
Hard ionization techniques in use at the time, like fast atom bombardment, were not directly applicable to peptides without destroying or breaking them.
The soft ionization tehniques however, revolutionized the proteomics field and it became possible to routinely ionize and analyze peptides using MALDI and ESI techniques at high-throughput scale. 
These two techniques were so impactful that the 2002 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was co-awarded to John Fenn (ESI) and Koichi Tanaka (MALDI) "for their development of soft desorption ionisation methods for mass spectrometric analyses of biological macromolecules". [@URL:https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/2002/summary/]. 
### MALDI
The term, Matrix-assisted LASER desorption ionization (MALDI), was coined by Hillenkamp and Karas in 1985[@URL:https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ac00291a042]. 
Karas and Hillenkamp discovered the MALDI technique first, although a similar ionization method was shown by Koichi Tanaka in 1988 [@DOI:10.1002/rcm.1290020802]. 
A few months later, Karas and Hillenkamp also demonstrated MALDI applied to protein ionization [@DOI:10.1021/ac00171a028].
It also created a controversy that the widely used method of MALDI from these two people had been overlooked, and the Nobel prize was awarded to Tanaka, whose system was rarely used[@URL:https://web.archive.org/web/20070517202246/http://cmbi.bjmu.edu.cn/news/0212/55.htm].

MALDI first requires the peptide sample to be co-crystallized with a matrix molecule, which is usually a volatile, low molecular-weight, organic aromatic compound.
Some examples of such compounds are cyno-hydroxycinnamic acid, dihyrobenzic acid, sinapinic acid, alpha-hydroxycinnamic acid, ferulic acid etc [@URL:https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23681820/].
Subsequently, the analyte is placed in a vacuum chamber in which it is irradiated with a LASER, usually at 337nm [@DOI:10.1021/cr010375i].
This laser energy is absorbed by the matrix, which then transfers that energy along with its free protons to the co-crystalized peptides without significantly breaking them.
The matrix and co-crystallized sample generate plumes, and the volatile matrix imparts its protons to the peptides as it gets ionized first.
The weak acidic conditions used as well as the acidic nature of the matrix allows easy exchange of protons for the peptides to get ionized and fly under the electrical field in the mass spectrometer.
These ionized peptides generally form the metastable ions, most of them will fragment quickly [@DOI:10.1021/ac00099a029].
However, it can take several milliseconds and the mass spectrometry analysis can be performed before this time.
The peptides almost always take up a single charge and thus observed and detected as [MH]+ peaks.

### Electrospray Ionization
ESI was first applied to peptides by John Fenn and coworkers in 1989 [@DOI:10.1126/science.2675315].
Concepts related to electrospray Ionization (ESI) were published at least as early as 1882, when Lord Rayleigh described the number of charges that could assemble on the surface of a droplet [@DOI:10.1080/14786448208628425]. 
ESI is usually coupled with reverse-phase liquid-chromatography of peptides directly interfaced to a mass spectrometer.
A high voltage is applied between the spraying needle and the mass spectrometer.
Through this needle, a fine mist of analyte as liquid droplets form at the tip of the needle.
Due to voltage and pressure, the droplet bursts into plumes of ions carrying protons from the liquid phase of the chromatography to impart ions to the analytes.
<!-- TODO, explicitly describe the taylor cone and coulombic explosion -->
The liquid phase is generally kept acidic to impart protons easily to the analytes.
As the peptide ionization takes place in the liquid phase, the peptides are usually doubly or triply charged [@DOI:10.1126/science.2675315], which makes it much easier to sequence the peptide in MS/MS as compared to MALDI which forms predominantly singly charged ions.
