## 9. Peptide Ionization {.page_break_before}

As early as the late 1950s, derivitization reagents were used to make peptides volatile enough for electron impact ionization analysis [@DOI:10.1021/ja01518a069]. 
Eventually this led to GC-MS analysis of derivatized peptides for sequencing [@DOI:10.1021/ja00802a048].
In the early 1980s, fast atom bombardment (FAB) enabled peptide ionization and sequencing by MS/MS [@DOI:10.1021/ac00234a035], but difficulty interfacing FAB with LC limited its utility [@DOI:10.1021/ja3094313].
New soft ionization techniques called matrix-assisted laser desorption (MALDI) and electrospray ionization (ESI) were applied to peptides around 1990, which revolutionized the field of proteomics by making high throughput ionization of peptides easy. 
These two techniques were so impactful that the 2002 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was co-awarded to John Fenn (ESI) and Koichi Tanaka (MALDI) "for their development of soft desorption ionization methods for mass spectrometric analyses of biological macromolecules" [@URL:https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/2002/summary]. 

### MALDI
The term "Matrix-assisted laser desorption" was coined by Hillenkamp and Karas in 1985, although this orignal paper only applied the technique to dipeptides [@URL:https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ac00291a042]. 
It was Koichi Tanaka who first applied this idea to proteins above 10,000 Daltons in size and published a paper in the Proceedings of the 2nd Japan-China Joint Symposium on Mass spectrometry in 1987 (Tanaka, K., Ido, Y., Akita, S., Yoshida, Y. and Yoshida, T. (1987) Detection of high mass molecules by laser desorption time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Proceedings of the 2nd Japan-China Joint Symposium on Mass spectrometry, 185-187), and then in a follow-up paper published in 1988 [@DOI:10.1002/rcm.1290020802]. 
A few months later, Karas and Hillenkamp also demonstrated MALDI applied to proteins above 10kDa with MALDI [@DOI:10.1021/ac00171a028].
This resulted in some controversy about who should have won the Nobel prize [@URL:https://web.archive.org/web/20070517202246/http://cmbi.bjmu.edu.cn/news/0212/55.htm] as it was felt by the community that Hillenkamp and Karas had provided the technology several years before but it was Koichi Tanaka that was the first to apply the MALDI technology to proteins a year before Hillenkamp and Karas.

MALDI first requires the peptide sample to be co-crystallized with a matrix molecule, which is usually a volatile, low molecular-weight, organic aromatic compound (**Figure 6**).
Some examples of such compounds are cyno-hydroxycinnamic acid, dihyrobenzic acid, sinapinic acid, alpha-hydroxycinnamic acid, ferulic acid etc [@PMID:23681820].
Subsequently, the analyte is placed in a vacuum chamber in which it is irradiated with a laser, usually at 337nm [@DOI:10.1021/cr010375i].
This laser energy is absorbed by the matrix, which then transfers that energy along with its free protons to the co-crystalized peptides without significantly breaking them.
The matrix and co-crystallized sample generate plumes, and the volatile matrix imparts its protons to the peptides as it gets ionized first.
The weak acidic conditions used as well as the acidic nature of the matrix allows easy exchange of protons for the peptides to get ionized and fly under the electrical field in the mass spectrometer.
These ionized peptides generally form the metastable ions, most of them will fragment quickly [@DOI:10.1021/ac00099a029].
However, it can take several milliseconds and the mass spectrometry analysis can be performed before this time.
Peptides ionized by MALDI almost always take up a single charge and thus observed and detected as [M+H]+ species.

#### MALDI Mechanism
![**MALDI**
The analyte-matrix mixture is irradiated by a laser source, leading to ablation. 
Desorption and proton transfer ionize the analyte molecules that can then be accelerated into a mass spectrometer.](images/MALDI.png){#fig:MALDI-mechanism tag="6" width="100%"}

According to PubMed, the number of publications related to MALDI peaked in 2013 and has been steadily declining. 
Concurrently, the usage of MALDI for bottom-up proteomics has subsided in favor of the better depth and throughput possible from using ESI. 
MALDI is still widely used for mass spectrometry imaging of proteins and metabolites [@PMID:29155564]. 

### Electrospray Ionization
ESI was first applied to peptides by John Fenn and coworkers in 1989 [@DOI:10.1126/science.2675315].
Concepts related to ESI were published at least as early as 1882, when Lord Rayleigh described the number of charges that could assemble on the surface of a droplet [@DOI:10.1080/14786448208628425]. 
ESI is usually coupled with reverse-phase liquid-chromatography of peptides directly interfaced to a mass spectrometer.
A high voltage (~ 2 kV) is applied between the spray needle and the mass spectrometer (**Figure 7**).
As solvent exits the needle, it forms droplets that take on charge at the surface, and through a debated mechanism, those charges are imparted to peptide ions.
The liquid phase is generally kept acidic to help impart protons easily to the analytes.

Tryptic peptides ionized by ESI usually carry one charge one the side chain of their C-terminal residue (Arg or Lys) and one charge at their n-terminal amine.
Peptides can have more than one charge if they have a longer peptide backbone, have histidine residues, or have missed cleavages leaving extra Arg and Lys.
In most cases, peptides ionized by ESI are observed at more than one charge state.
Evidence suggests that the distribution of peptide charge states can be manipulated through chemical additives [@PMID:22610994].

#### Electrospray Mechanism
![**Electrospray Ionization** 
Charged droplets are formed, their size is reduced due to evaporation until charge repulsion leads to Coulomb fission and results in charged analyte molecules.](images/ESI.png){#fig:ESI-mechanism tag="7" width="100%"}

The main goal of ESI is the production of gas-phase ions from electrolyte ions in solution. 
During the process of ionization, the solution emerging from the electrospray needle or capillary is distorted into a Taylor cone and charged droplets are formed.
The charged droplets subsequently decrease in size due to solvent evaporation.
As the droplets shrink, the charge density and Coulombic repulsion increase. 
This process destabilizes the droplets until the repulsion between the charges is higher than the surface tension and they fission (Coulomb explosion) [@PMID:19551695] [@PMID:23134552].
Typical bottom-up proteomics experiments make use of acidic analyte solutions which leads to the formation of positively charged analyte molecules due to an excess presence of protons.

<!-- TODO, explicitly describe the taylor cone and coulombic explosion -->
<!-- TODO: discussion of ionizaation mechanisms, ion evaporation versus charge residue model -->

