## Biological Interpretation {.page_break_before}

Nearly every untargeted proteomics experiment will result in a list of proteins or peptides of interest which require further orthogonal validation and biological interpretation.
In this section, we aim to present a concise overview of how proteomic data can be effectively contextualised and used to generate new hypotheses. 

1. term enrichment analysis (KEGG, GO, GSEA, ORA)

Term enrichment analysis is performed to assess whether particular 'functional terms' are over-represented in a list of proteins (e.g. from a proteomics experiment). 
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis - 
KEGG - 
GSEA - Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (based on ranked list of proteins)

ORA - Over-representation Analysis

- independent of ranking 

3. network analysis methods
4. structure analysis
5. isoform analysis

6. follow-up experiments

Orthogonal validation techniques of discovery proteomic data sets are context-dependent.
Depending on the question, researchers can draw on a myriad of techniques to validate MS-derived hypotheses in appropriate cellular, organismal or in vitro models. 
Protein abundance changes measured by bottom-up proteomics are commonly validated on a protein-to-protein basis using techniques such as immunoblotting analysis or immunofluorescence and immunohistological stainings. 
The latter also allows for validation of protein expression and localisation in intact tissue or cells. 
However, these semiquantitative methods are commonly strongly influenced by the quality of the antibodies used and might not be sensitive enough to detect small changes in protein levels. In this case, more accurate orthogonal quantitation of proteins might be achieved by stable isotope labelling (SILAC/TMT/iTRAQ) and/or SRM/PRM.    

Other validation methods (COMMENT: This might be compiled into a large table for the sake of brevity and perspicuity?): 

protein-protein interactions (PPIs) / protein complex composition:
The interaction of a protein with other proteins determines its function. PPIs can be either mostly static (i.e. core subunits of a protein complex) or dynamic, varying with cellular state (i.e. cell cycle phase or cellular stress responses) or environmental factors (i.e. availability of nutrients, presence of extracellular ligands of cell-surface receptors). Therefore, any given protein can typically bind a range of interaction partners in a spatially and temporally restricted manner, thus forming complex PPI networks (the interactome of a protein). Tandem affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (TAP-MS) as well as proximity-dependent labelling apporaches (i.e. BioID) often return multiple potential binding partners, many of which might be artefactual due to loss of cellular compartmentalisation during sample preparation etc. It is thereofore necessary to confirm potential novel PPIs using independent approaches. Multipel excellent literature reviews have been dedicated to these orthogonal methodologies of which a brief summary is presented in Table XYZ [to be compiled].     
- co-immunoprecipitation/affinity purification from whole-cell lysate or fractionated samples followed by SDS-page & immunoblotting analysis
- BN-PAGE, analytical ultracentrifugation
- velocity gradient sedimentation assays (indirect/co-sedimentation)
- SEC-MS, HPLC of purified proteins (indirect/co-elution)
- FRET, BRET, biomolecular fluorescence complementation (i.e split-GFP systems)
- proximity ligation assay (PLA)
- Yeast Two Hybrid systems
- Mammalian Two Hybrid systems 
- in silico systems biology tools 

posttranlational modifications:
- PTM-specific antibodies (i.e. phosphoantibodies)
- ubiquitination 

conformational changes: 
Altered accessibility of broad-specificity proteases (i.e. proteinase K) to regions of a native protein can be used as a proxy readout for dynamic structural alterations (see LiP-MS). However, the interpretation of differential cleavage patterns still remains challenging as a range of biological processes can effectively modulate protease accessibility. For instance, differential protease cleavage patterns in a native protein can be affected by a change in its interaction with other proteins or metabolites (occluding or exposing protease cleavage sites), conformational changes, and a host of posttranslational modifications (i.e. phosphorylation). Therefore, orthogonal approaches are necessary to assess which of these possibilities are at the root of any observed ‘structural change’. 

Discussed below are multiple methodologies harnessed to further validate and assess structural changes in individual proteins.

-	NMR
-	Semiquantitative methods (IB with conformation-specific antibodies)
-	In silico molecular dynamics simulations 


[in progress]
