## Analysis of Raw Data {.page_break_before}

The goal of basic data analysis is to convert raw spectral data into identities and quantities of peptides and proteins that can be used for biologically-focused analysis. 
This step may often include measures of quality control, cross-run data normalization, quantification on different levels (precursor, peptide, protein), protein inference, PTM (post translational modification) localization and also first steps of data analysis, such as statistical hypothesis tests. 

In typical bottom-up proteomics experiments, proteins are digested into peptides and further analyzed with LC-MS/MS systems. 
Peptides can have different PTMs and ionize differently depending on their length and amino acid distributions. 
Therefore, mass spectrometers often record different charge and modification states of one single peptide. 
The entity that is recorded on a mass spectrometer is usually referred to as a precursor ion (peptide with its modification and charge state). 
This precursor ion is fragmented and the precursor or peptide sequences are obtained though spectral matching. 
The quantity of a precursor is estimated with various methods.
The measured precursor quantities are combined to generate a peptide quantity. 
Peptides are also often combined into a protein group through protein inference, which combines multiple peptide identifications into a single protein identification [@PMID:16009968] [@DOI:10.1016/j.jprot.2016.08.002].
Protein inference is still a challenge in bottom-up proteomics. 

Due to the inherent differences in the data structures of DDA and DIA measurements, there exist different types of software that can facilitate the steps mentioned above. 
The existing software for DDA and DIA analysis can be further divided into freeware and non-freeware:

#### DDA freeware 

|   Name   |         Publication           |             Website               |
|:--------:|:-----------------------------:|:---------------------------------:|
| MaxQuant |Cox and Mann, 2008[@DOI:10.1038/nbt.1511]|[MaxQuant](https://www.maxquant.org/)    |
| MSFragger|   Kong et al., 2017[@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.4256]    |    [MSFragger](https://msfragger.nesvilab.org/) |
| Mascot   |Perkins et al., 1999[@PMID:10612281]             |    [Mascot](https://www.matrixscience.com/)     |
| MS-GF+   |Kim et al., [@DOI:10.1038/ncomms6277]            | [MS-GF+](https://github.com/MSGFPlus/msgfplus)  |
| X!Tandem |Craig et al., [@DOI:10.1002/rcm.1198;@DOI:10.1093/bioinformatics/bth092]  | [GPMDB](https://www.thegpm.org/tandem/) |


#### DIA freeware:

|   Name   |         Publication           |             Website               |
|:--------:|:-----------------------------:|:---------------------------------:|
| MaxDIA |Cox and Mann, 2008[@DOI:10.1038/nbt.1511]|        [MaxQuant](https://www.maxquant.org/)    |
| Skyline|MacLean et al., 2010[@DOI:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq054]|[Skyline](https://skyline.ms/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view) |
| DIA-NN|Demichev et al., 2019[@DOI:10.1038/s41592-019-0638-x]  |    [DIA-NN](https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN)     |


#### Targeted proteomics freeware:

|   Name   |         Publication           |             Website               |
|:--------:|:-----------------------------:|:---------------------------------:|
| Skyline|MacLean et al., 2010[@DOI:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq054]|[Skyline](https://skyline.ms/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view) |


#### DDA non-freeware:

|   Name   |         Publication           |             Website               |
|:--------:|:-----------------------------:|:---------------------------------:|
| ProteomeDiscoverer ||[ProteomeDiscoverer](https://www.thermofisher.com/ch/en/home/industrial/mass-spectrometry/liquid-chromatography-mass-spectrometry-lc-ms/lc-ms-software/multi-omics-data-analysis/proteome-discoverer-software.html)|
| Mascot             |Perkins et al., 1999[@PMID:10612281]             |    [Mascot](https://www.matrixscience.com/)     |
| Spectromine   |           |    [Spectromine](ttps://biognosys.com/software/spectromine/?gclid=Cj0KCQiAoY-PBhCNARIsABcz770mjUz6iavBr9Ql7RPUdMvaHu9RYgPNrEfZco1wExEeoFwnQXuCHscaAlgBEALw_wcB)     |
| PEAKS   |Tran et al., 2018[@DOI:10.1038/s41592-018-0260-3] | [PEAKS](https://www.bioinfor.com/peaks-studio/)  |


#### DIA non-freeware:

|   Name   |         Publication           |             Website               |
|:--------:|:-----------------------------:|:---------------------------------:|
| Spectronaut |Bruderer et al., 2015[@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M114.044305]|[Spectronaut](https://biognosys.com/software/spectronaut/)|
| PEAKS   |Tran et al., 2018[@DOI:10.1038/s41592-018-0260-3] | [PEAKS](https://www.bioinfor.com/peaks-studio/)  |


#### Data Summary and Interpretation
|    Name    |            Publication     |                 Website              |
|:----------:|:--------------------------:|:------------------------------------:|
|Peptide Shaker|Vaudel _et al._, 2015[@DOI:10.1038/nbt.3109;@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.1c00678]|[PeptideShaker](http://compomics.github.io/projects/peptide-shaker.html), [Peptide Shaker Online](https://github.com/barsnes-group/peptide-shaker-online)|


### Analysis of DDA data
DDA data analysis either directly uses the vendor proprietary data format directly with a proprietary search engine like Mascot, Sequest (through Proteome Discoverer), Paragon (through Protein Pilot), or it can be processed through one of the many freely available search engines or pipelines, for example, MaxQuant, MSGF+, X!Tandem, Morpheus, MSFragger, and OMSSA. 
Tables 1 and 4 give weblinks and citations for these software tools.
<!-- todo: need to make sure all these are listed in the table and cited -->
<!-- todo: need a paragraph discussing intergration environments like the transproteomics pipeline (TPP) and IDpicker -->
For analysis with freeware, raw data is converted to either text-based MGF (mascot generic format) or into a standard open XML format like mzML [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.R110.000133] [@PMID:20013381][@DOI:10.1074/mcp.R112.019695]. 
The appropriate FASTA file containing proteins predicted from that organism's genome is chosen as a reference database to search the experimental spectra.
All search parameters like peptide and fragment mass errors (i.e. MS1 and MS2 tolerances), enzyme specificity, number of missed cleavages, chemical artefacts (fixed modifications) and potential biological modifications (variable/dynamic modifications) are specified before executing the search.
The search algorithm scores each query spectrum against its possible peptide matches [@DOI:10.1002/mas.21543]. 
A spectrum and its best scoring candidate peptide are called a peptide spectrum match (PSM).
The scores reflect a _goodness-of-fit_ between an experimental spectrum and a theoretical one and do not necessarily depict the correctness of the peptide assignment.

For evaluating the matches, a decoy database is preferred as a null model for peptide matching.
A randomized or reversed version of target database is used as a nonparametric null model.
The decoy database can be searched separate from the target database (Kall's method)[@DOI:10.1021/pr700600n] or it can be combined with the target database before search (Elias and Gygi method)[@PMID:17327847].
Using either separate method or concatenated database search method, an estimate of false hits can be calculated which is used to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) [@DOI:10.1007/978-1-4939-3106-4_7]. 
The FDR denotes the proportion of false hits in the population accepted as true.
For Kall's method: the false hits are estimated to be the number of decoys above a given threshold. 
It is assumed that the number of decoy hits that pass a threshold are the false hits. 
A similar number of target population may also be false. 
Therefore, the FDR is calculated as [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00144]:

$$FDR = \frac{Decoy PSMs + 1}{Target PSMs}$$

For Elias and Gygi Method, the target population in which FDR is estimated changes.
The target and decoy hits coming from a joint database compete against each other.
For any spectrum, either a target or a decoy peptide can be the best hit.
It is argued that the joint target-decoy population has decoy hits as confirmed false hits.
However, due to the joint database search, the target database may also have equal number of false hits. 
Thus, the number of false hits is multiplied by two for FDR estimation.

$$FDR = \frac{2 * Decoy PSMs}{Target + Decoy PSMs}$$


### Strategies for analysis of DIA data

### Targeted proteomics data analysis

### Quality control

Quality control should be a central aspect of any mass spectrometry-based study to ensure reproducibility of generated results.
There are two types of quality controls that can be conducted for any kind of mass spectrometry experiment.
The first one is focused on monitoring the perfomance of the instruments themselves (e.g. HPLC and mass spectrometer), whereas the second one is focused on your experiments. 
For further reading, we recommend to take a look at issue 11 on quality control published in the journal _Proteomics_ in 2011 [@DOI:10.1002/pmic.201190020], especially the review by Köcher _et al._ [@DOI:10.1002/pmic.201000578], as well as the review published by Bittremieux _et al._ in 2017 [@DOI:10.1002/mas.21544].

#### Instrument Performance

It is generally advisable to monitor instrument performance regularly. 
Instrument calibrations in regular intervals help ensure that performance is maintained.
Often basic calibration and sensitivity can be checked by direct infusion of a standard.
During the calibration you can check injection times (for ion trap instruments) and intensity of the ions in the calibration mix.

After ensuring good calibration and signal with the simple calibration mixture, it is advisable to analyze complex samples, such as tryptic digests of whole-cell lysates (e.g. HeLa cells, HEK cells, yeast, etc.) or tryptic digests of purified proteins.
The additional check with a complex sample ensures all aspects of the system are working together correctly, especially the liquid chromatography and emitter.
These digests should be analyzed after every instrument calibration and periodically between samples when acquiring more extensive batches.
Data measured from tryptic digests should be analyzed by the software of your choice and the numbers of identified peptide precursors and proteins can be compared with previous controls for consistency.

Another strategy is to analyze digested purified proteins, which easily enable discovery of retention time shifts and mass accuracy problems. 
In case you are working with a Thermo mass spectrometer, you can open the acquired .raw file directly either in FreeStyle or in Qual Browser and look for specific m/z values of your peptides.
Looking at the intensity of the extracted peaks will help identify sensitivity fluctuations. 

Carry-over between different measurments can be identified from blank measurements which are subsequently analyzed with your search software of choice.
Blank measurements can be injections of different buffers, water or the starting conditions of your liquid chromatography. 
In case of increased detection of carry-over, injections with trifluoroethanol can be performed.

Another factor to take into consideration is the stability of your electrospray.
Electrospray stability tends to worsen over time as columns wear, as well as when measuring samples with residual contaminants, such as salts or detergents. 
You will notice spray instabilities either in the total ion chromatogram (TIC) as thin spikes with short periods of no measured signal or if you install cameras at your ESI source.
Suboptimal spray conditions will usually result in droplets forming on the emitter, being released into the mass spectrometer (also referred to as "spitting"). 
Real-time quality control software (listed in the table below) can help you identify instrument issues right away.

#### Data Quality Control

Apart from instrument performance, any kind of data analysis should have proper quality control in place to identify problematic measurements and to exclude them if necessary. 
It is recommended to develop a standardized system for data quality control early on and to keep this consistent over time. 
Adding indexed retention time (iRT) peptides can help identify and correct gradient and retention time inconsistencies between samples at the data analysis stage.
Decoy searches help monitor and control the false-discovery rate. 
Inlcuding common contaminants, such as keratins, in the FASTA files used for searches can help identify sample preparation issues.
Other parameters to check in your analysis are the consistency of the number of peptide-spectrum matches, identified peptides and proteins over all samples of your study, as well as your coefficients of variation between your replicates.
Before and after data normalization (if normalization is performed) it is good to compare the median intensities of all measurments to identify potential measurement or normalization issues. 
Precursor charge distributions, missed cleavage numbers, peak width, as well as the number of points per peak are additional parameters that can be checked.
In case you are analyzing different conditions, you can perform hierarchical clustering or a principal component analysis to check if your samples cluster as expected.

#### Quality Control Software

##### Raw file and real-time analysis

|    Name    |         Supported instrument vendors        |            Website/Download           |            publication            |           Note               |
|:----------:|:-------------------------------------------:|:-------------------------------------:|:---------------------------------:|:----------------------------:|
| QuiC | Thermo Scientific, AB SCIEX, Agilent, Bruker, Waters |[QuiC](https://biognosys.com/resources/quic-manual/)|                      | requires Biognosys iRT peptides |
| AlphaPept |  Thermo Scientific, Bruker              | [AlphaPept](https://github.com/MannLabs/alphapept) | [@DOI:10.1101/2021.07.23.453379]    |                      |
| RawMeat 2.1 | Thermo Scientific | [RawMeat](https://proteomicsresource.washington.edu/protocols06/RawMeat_1007.exe) |      |          |
| rawDiag | Thermo Scientific | [rawDiag](https://github.com/fgcz/rawDiag) |   [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00173]        |                 |
| rawrr | Thermo Scientific | [rawrr](https://github.com/fgcz/rawrr) |  [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00866]    |                       |
| rawBeans |  Thermo or mzML   | [rawBeans](https://bitbucket.org/incpm/prot-qc/downloads/)|   [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00956]     |                  |
| SIMPATIQCO | Thermo Scientific | [SIMPATIQCO](https://ms.imp.ac.at/index.php?action=simpatiqco) | [@DOI:10.1021/pr300163u]    |                     |
| QC-ART |                     | [QC-ART](https://github.com/stanfill/QC-ART) | [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.RA118.000648] |                      |
| SprayQc | Thermo Scientific, AB SCIEX, extensible to other instrumentation | [SprayQc](http://sourceforge.org/projects/sprayqc) | [@DOI:10.1021/pr201219e] |               |
| Metriculator |         | [Metriculator](http://github.com/princelab/metriculator) | [@DOI:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt510] |            |
| MassQC |               | [MassQC](https://massqc.proteomesoftware.com/) |                   |                     |
| OpenMS |               | [OpenMS](https://www.openms.de/) |  [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.3959]   |                  |

##### Search result QC

|    Name    |       Website/Download/publication        |              publication        |              Note           |
|:----------:|:-----------------------------------------:|:-------------------------------:|:----------------------------:|
| MSStats |[MSStats](https://github.com/Vitek-Lab/MSstats) |  [@DOI:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu305]|   can use output from MaxQuant, Proteome Discoverer, Skyline, Progenesis, Spectronaut |
| MSStatsQC |[MSStatsQC](https://msstats.org/msstatsqc/)   |  [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M116.064774]    |               |
| PTXQC |[PTXQC](https://github.com/cbielow/PTXQC) |[@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00780] | requires MaxQuant search engine output | 
| protti | [protti](https://github.com/jpquast/protti) | [@DOI:10.1093/bioadv/vbab041]      |                   |

<!-- todo: this table is probably very incomplete. Add more tools -->


### Statistical hypothesis testing


