## 12. Data Acquisition {.page_break_before}

Hybrid mass spectrometers used for modern proteome analysis offer the flexibility to collect data in many different ways. 
Data acquisition strategies differ in the sequence of precursor scans and fragment ion scans, and in how analytes are chosen for MS/MS. 
Constant innovation to develop better data collection methods improves our view of the proteome, but many method options may confuse newcomers. 
This section provides an overview of the general classes of data collection methods. 

Data acquisition strategies for proteomics fall into one of two groups.

1. Data dependent acquisition (DDA), in which the exact scan sequence in each analysis depends on the data that the mass spectrometer observes.
2. Data independent acquisition (DIA), in which the exact scan sequence in each analysis DOES NOT depend on the data; the collected scans are the same whether you inject yeast peptides, human peptides, or a solvent blank.  

DDA and DIA can both be further subdivided in to targeted and untargeted methods. 

### DDA

In most cases, the peptide masses that will be observed are not known before doing the experiment. 
Data collection methods must account for this.
DDA was invented in the early 1990s, which enabled collecting MS/MS spectra for observed peptides as they eluting from the LC column [@DOI:10.1006/meth.1994.1031; @DOI:10.1021/ac00104a020; @PMID:24203425]. 

#### Untargeted DDA
A common method currently used in modern proteomics is untargeted DDA. 
The MS collects precursor (MS1) scans iteratively until precursor mass envelopes meeting certain criteria are detected. 
Criteria for selection are usually specific charge states and a minimum signal intensity.
When those ions meet these criteria, the MS selects those masses for fragmentation.

Because ions are selected as they are observed, repeated DDA of the same sample will produce a different set of identifications. 
This stochasticity is the main drawback of DDA. 

Because DDA is required for quantification of proteins using isobaric tags like TMT, this stochasticity of DDA limits the ability to compare quantities across batches. 
For example, if you have 30 samples, you can use two sets of the 16-plex kit to label 15 samples in each set with one channel labeled by a pooled sample to enable comparison across the groups.
When you collect DDA data from each of those sets, each set will have MS/MS data from an overlapping but different set of peptides. 
If one set has MS/MS from a peptide but the other set does not, then that peptide cannot be quantified in the whole sample group. 
This limits the number of quantified proteins in large TMT experiments with multiple batches. 
<!-- mention intelligent DDA and real time search? -->

#### Targeted DDA
Targeted DDA is not common in modern proteomics. 
In targeted DDA, in addition to general criteria like a minimum intensity and a certain charge state, the mass spectrometer looks for specific masses.
These masses might be previously observed signals that were previously missed by MS/MS [@DOI:10.1021/pr800828p; @DOI:10.1074/mcp.M700029-MCP200].
In these studies, the sample is first analyzed by LC-MS to detect precursor ion features with some software, and then subsequent analyses target those masses for fragmentation with inclusion lists until they are all fragmented. 
This was shown to increase proteome coverage. 

### DIA
The simplest method to operate a mass spectrometer is to have predefined scans that are collected for each sample analysis.
This is data-independent acquisition (DIA); the scan sequence does not depend on the data that the instrument observes. 
Thus, the scan sequence is repetitive, looping through predetermined scans, most often which are *m/z* quadrupole selection ranges followed by fragmentation in a second quadrupole and fragment ion detection in a final MS stage. 
In DIA, the same scan sequence is performed if we inject air, a blank, peptides, ammonia, or anything. 
Like DDA, DIA can also be either targeted or untargeted [@DOI:10.1080/14789450.2017.1322904].
The two targeted DIA methods are SRM/MRM or PRM.
Untargeted DIA (uDIA) is often referred to simply as "DIA" or "SWATH" (Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Mass Spectra) (**Figure 15**).

![**Types of DIA.**
A) SRM/MRM. 
Peptides are ionized by ESI and although there are many peptides entering the mass spectrometer at any time, the first quadrupole (Q1) isolates one mass, which is then fragmented by HCD. 
Fragment masses from the peptide are then selected in the third quadrupole (Q3). 
This leads to very low noise and high sensitivity.
B) PRM. 
Like MRM, peptides are selected in the first quadrupole, but this analysis is done on a high-resolution instrument like an Orbitrap or TOF. 
Selectivity is gained by exploiting the high mass accuracy and resolution to monitor multiple fragment ions. 
C) uDIA/SWATH. 
Like MRM and PRM, peptides are isolated with Q1, but in this case a much wider isolation window is used. 
This usually results in co-isolation of many peptides simultaneously. 
Fragments from many peptides are measured with high resolution and high mass accuracy.
Special software is used to get peptide identities and quantities from the fragment ions. 
](images/data-acquisition-DIA-types.svg){#fig:DIA-types tag="15" width="100%"}

#### Targeted DIA
The first type of targeted DIA is called SRM or MRM [@DOI:10.1016/j.ymeth.2013.05.004].
The popularity of this method in the literature peaked in 2014, with just under 1,500 documents on PubMed that year resulting from a search for "MRM".
In this strategy, the QQQ MS is set so that the first quadrupole selects the precursor mass of the peptide(s) of interest, the second quadrupole fragments the peptide, and the third quadrupole monitors the product of specific fragments from that peptide. 
This strategy is very sensitive and has the benefit of very low noise. 
The fragments monitored in Q3 are chosen such that it is unlikely these fragments could arise from another peptide. 
Usually at least a few transitions are monitored for each peptide in order to get multiple measures for that peptide. 

An early example of MRM applied to quantify c-reactive protein was in 2004 [@DOI:10.1002/pmic.200300670].
Around the same time, SRM was combined with antibody enrichment of peptides from target proteins [@DOI:10.1021/pr034086h].
This approach was popular for analysis of plasma proteins [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M500331-MCP200].
These early examples led to many more studies that used QQQ MS instruments to get accurate quantitation of many proteins in one injection [@DOI:10.1016/j.aca.2017.01.059; @DOI:10.1586/erm.12.32]. 
Scheduling MRM measurement when chromatography is stable additionally enabled better utilization of instrument duty cycle and therefore monitoring of more peptides per injection [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M700132-MCP200].
Efforts even developed libraries of transitions that allow quantification of any protein in model organisms [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth1108-913].

Another similar targeted DIA method is called parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.O112.020131].
Instead of using a QQQ instrument, PRM uses a hybrid MS with a quadrupole and a high-resolution mass analyzer, such as an Q-TOF or Q-Exactive. 
The idea is that instead of monitoring specific fragments in Q3, the high mass accuracy can be used to filter peptide fragments for high selectivity and accurate quantification. 
Studies have found that PRM and MRM/SRM have comparable dynamic range and linearity [@DOI:10.1016/j.jprot.2014.10.017].


#### Untargeted DIA

There were many implementations of uDIA over the years, starting in 2003 by Purvine et al from the Goodlett lab [@DOI:10.1002/pmic.200300362]. 
In this first work they demonstrated uDIA using a Q-TOF with in source fragmentation and showed that extracted ion chromatograms of precursor and fragment ions matched in shape suggesting that this could be used to identify and quantify peptides. 
The following year, Venable et al from the Yates lab introduced uDIA with an ion trap [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth705].
Subsequent methods include MSE [@DOI:10.1002/rcm.2550], PAcIFIC [@DOI:10.1021/ac900888s], all ions fragmentation (AIF) [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M110.001537].
Computational methods were also developed to automate interpretation of this data, such as DeMux [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.M110.001537], XDIA [@DOI:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq031], and ETISEQ [@DOI:10.1186/1471-2105-10-244].

The paper that is often cited for uDIA that led to widespread adoption was by Gillet et al. from the Aebersold group in 2012 [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.O111.016717].
In this paper they branded the idea as SWATH.
Widespread adoption may have been facilitated by the co-marketing of this idea by ABSciex as a proteomics solution on their new 5600 Q-TOF (called "tripleTOF" despite containing only one TOF, likely a portmanteau of "triple quadrupole" and "Q-TOF"). 
Importantly, in the Gillet et al. paper the authors described a computational method to extract information from SWATH where peptides of interest were queried against the data.
They also demonstrated the application of SWATH to measure proteomic changes that happen in diauxic shift, and showed that SWATH can reveal modified peptides, in this case a methionine oxidation. 

There are also many papers describing uDIA with orbitraps.
One early example described combining random isolation windows together and then demultiplexing the chimeric spectra [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.2528].
In another landmark paper, over 6,000 proteins were identified from mouse tissue by at least 2 peptides [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.RA117.000314]. 
In 2018, the new model orbitrap at that time (HF-X) enabled identification of nearly 6,000 human proteins in only 30 minutes. 
Currently orbitraps have all but replaced the Sciex Q-TOFs for DIA data collection. 

A new direction in uDIA is the addition of ion separation by ion mobility. 
This has appeared in two forms.
On the timsTOF, diaPASEF makes use of the trapped ion mobility to increase speed and sensitivity of analysis [@DOI:10.1038/s41592-020-00998-0].
On the orbitrap, the combination of FAIMS and DIA has enabled the identification of over 10,000 proteins from one sample, which is a major milestone [@DOI:10.1021/acs.jproteome.2c00023].

#### Acquisition methods for PTMs
##### Phosphopeptides
Resonant CID [@DOI:10.1074/mcp.m111.009910] and beam-type HCD [@DOI:10.1021/pr100637q] are the most popular methods for unmodified and modified peptides due to their speed, accessibility, and efficiency. 
Due to the weak phosphoester bond relative to the peptide backbone, resonant CID usually produces spectra that are dominated by only the neutral loss of the phosphate. 
For this reason, the optimal dissociation methods for phosphopeptide identification and phosphosite localization include HCD or ExD-based methods, discussed later in more depth [@DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.7b00212; @DOI:10.1021/pr301130k]. 
ExD methods generate phosphopeptide MS/MS spectra with many c- and z•-type fragment ions for peptide sequencing and localization of labile phosphate modifications, typically disrupted with CID [@DOI:10.1073/pnas.0402700101]. 
Gas-phase phosphate rearrangement induced by collisional activation represents a glaring challenge for the field and several have explored site localization in the face of rearrangement [@DOI:10.1021/ac801768s; @DOI:10.1002/pmic.201200384; @DOI:10.1074/mcp.m900619-mcp200].

Advanced data acquisition schemes trigger predetermined MS/MS events when a specific fragment ion or neutral loss is detected in a spectrum. 
Certain decision-tree strategies have arisen to increase data acquisition efficiency, including pseudo-MS3 scans which are triggered on detection of phosphate losses [@DOI:10.1021/ac0497104] and the use of site-specific x-type ions [@DOI:10.1021/pr200154t]. 
For example, when linear ion traps were the main proteomics workhorses, resonant CID analysis of phosphopeptides would result in predominantly neutral loss of the phosphate with limited sequence ion information. 
To gain sequence ions in these experiments, instruments could be set to isolate a loss of 98 Daltons for MS3 activation [@DOI:10.1073/pnas.0404720101; @DOI:10.1002/pmic.200800283].
The newer collisional dissociation technique HCD, or beam-type collisional activation, significantly improves the detection of peptide fragments with the phosphorylation intact on fragment ions, and thus, this neutral loss scanning technique is no longer common. 

Recently developed approaches to phosphopeptide identification include DIA-based phosphoproteomics with Spectronaut [@DOI:10.1126/scisignal.aaa3139; @DOI:10.1007/978-1-0716-1641-3_6], “plug-and-play” high-resolution MS [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.3811], SureQuant for phosphotyrosine [@DOI:10.1158/0008-5472.can-20-3804], PIQED for direct identification and quantification of phosphorylation from DIA without a prior spectral library [@DOI:10.1038/nmeth.4334], and FAIMS front-end separations which yield 15-20% more phosphosite identifications than non-FAIMS experiments [@DOI:10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02233]. 
For quantification of phosphoproteins, Hogrebe et al. investigated several of the most common strategies and concluded that TMT-based MS2 strategies may be the current best approach [@DOI:10.1038/s41467-018-03309-6]. 

##### Glycopeptides
A similar product-dependent MS/MS triggering strategy was introduced for N-linked glycopeptides [@DOI:10.1021/pr300257c]. 
Collisional dissociation of glycosylated peptides produces oxonium ions, for example at *m/z* 204.09 (HexNAc) or *m/z* 366.14 (HexHexNAc). 
If oxonium ions from the fragmented glycan are detected among the most abundant fragment ions of the HCD spectra, then an ETD scan is triggered. 
This ETD scan provides information about the peptide sequence, while the original HCD scan provides glycan structure information. 
