## Tandem Mass Spectrometry and Peptide Fragmentation {.page_break_before}

### Tandem Mass Spectrometry
Why do we need tandem mass spectra data for proteomics? 
As mass accuracy and resolution increase, the number of potential peptide matches decrease.
Still, there are many potential matches to a human peptide with a 5 ppm mass tolerance window (citation).
Additional information is required to uniquely assign a signal to a peptide. 
Early approaches described use of accurate mass and time data to uniquely identify peptides [@DOI:10.2144/04374RV01]. 
Most current research, however, has pursued using the pattern of peptide fragment masses helps narrow down the number of potential peptides. 


### Peptide Fragmentation

*how it works*
Modern proteomics utilizes hybrid mass spectrometers, where hybrid means there are multiple mass analyzers working in harmony.
Most hybrid mass spectrometers combine a quadrople for mass selection before a high resolution analyzer, usually a TOF or an orbitrap. 
In these hybrid mass spectrometers, mass selection happens using the first quadrupole to isolate a small mass range around that mass (usually less than 1 thompson).
The selected ions then pass to the collision cell where fragmentation happens. 

<!-- linear ion traps don't need a quadrupole first -->

1. Nomenclature of backbone fragments (abc, xyz, internal, losses).
2. Mechanisms of peptide fragmentation, collision based (CID and HCD, PQD?) versus electron based (ECD and ETD).


### Basic Spectral Interpretation
Segway into the section on raw data analysis. 




