## 16. Biological Interpretation  {.page_break_before}

The most common untargeted proteomics experiment will produce a list of proteins or peptides of interest which require further validation and biological interpretation.
This list usually results from statistical data analysis; the typical output of differentially expressed proteins usually contains hundreds of hits. 
In this section, we aim to present a concise overview of how proteomic data can be effectively contextualized and used to generate new hypotheses.

The simplest approach is to start manual lookup of every protein in the list to uncover groups that function together.
Starting with a list of hundreds of protein changes, a smaller list can be prioritized by considering the level of significance and effect size.
For example, proteins with the smallest p-values (significance) and largest abundance fold-changes (effect size).
It is tempting to focus on proteins with the most extreme fold changes. 
In this case, the assumption is that the more significant the fold change (in either direction, up- or down-regulation), the higher the impact of those proteins on cellular behavior. 
This assumption is not always valid because protein signal in MS depends on abundance.
The manual data interpretation approach is typically infeasible due to the number of proteins that would need to be individually looked up one-by-one.

A better strategy is to use computational methods.
These methods may consider the whole list of proteins including some ranking by significance or fold change. 
One common interpretation method is to construct a protein network, which then lends itself to network analyses. 
Another method is to consider functional enrichment through annotation databases.
These databases offer insights by examining the enrichment of certain functional annotations amongst the interesting proteins.
Secondly, one could consider other evolutionary, structurally or regulatory based methods to identify interpretation of the data.
To fully interpret analysis, it may be required to perform or examine other data such as data from biophysical, biochemical and alternative proteomic approaches.
Finally, the data can further be interpreted using multi-omic, native or clinical approaches.
Below we summarize these approaches and point out potential pitfalls with these methods.

### Constructing a protein network

A network is a representation of the relations between objects. 
Nodes are the entities of the network (e.g., users of a social platform, train stations, proteins), while edges are the connections between them (e.g., friendship, routes, and protein interactions, respectively). 
In the case of protein-protein interactions, evidence for the functional associations between proteins can be obtained experimentally. 
For example, co-immunoprecipitation, crosslinking, and proximity labeling can be used to reveal physical interactions [@PMID:34046695]. 
The data is presented in a table with nodes and edges (e.g., "protein A interacts with protein B") from which the network can be constructed. 
A considerable wealth of protein-protein association data is stored in free databases like IntAct, which contain interactions derived from literature curation or direct user submissions [@PMID:34761267]. 
Protein interactions can also be predicted by classifiers that consider many features, like orthology and co-localization, to produce a posterior odds ratio of interaction [@PMID:21572181; @PMID:33237311]. 

Large repositories like STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) collect and integrate protein-protein interaction data from several databases [@PMID:33237311]. 
STRING also provides a web-based interface to survey the data, and users only have to feed a search box with the identifiers of the protein(s) of interest. 
STRING will retrieve the network and show the evidence supporting each interaction. 
Importantly, these databases do not indicate the direction of the interaction, so they produce undirected networks. 

There are many other options for generating and working with networks.
For example, geneMANIA can generate a network from data [@DOI:10.1093/nar/gkq537].
Cytoscape is a free tool useful for generating and interacting with networks [@DOI:10.1101/gr.1239303].


### Network analysis

Network analysis is a group of techniques that explore and investigate the network, yielding valuable knowledge about its structure and unveiling key players regulating the flow of information. 
One of the first steps in network analysis relates to centrality measurements. 
Centralities are indicators of the relative importance of a node corresponding to its position in the network, and each centrality measure provides new insights to interpret the data in new ways [@PMID:27616995; @PMID:30064421].

#### Degree centrality
  
The degree of a node measures the number of edges incident to that node. 
Nodes with a high degree interact with many other nodes, called first neighbors. 
In particular, the node degree distribution in protein networks is highly skewed, with most nodes having a low degree and a few having high degrees, known as hubs.
Hubs are usually regulatory proteins, being notable examples oncogenes and transcription factors. 
Moreover, hubs are attractive targets for directed interventions, as their alteration has a profound effect on the stability of the network [@PMID:16751849]. 

#### Closeness centrality

The route from one node to another is a path, and the shortest path is the one connecting them in the least amount of steps. 
Closeness centrality is the inverse of the average length of a node's shortest paths to all other nodes in the network. 
Nodes with a high closeness score have the shortest distances to all the others, so closeness centrality calculations detect nodes that can spread information very efficiently, as they are in a better position in the network for this task [@PMID:15616139; @{URL:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/online/courses/network-analysis-of-protein-interaction-data-an-introduction/building-and-analysing-ppins/topological-ppin-analysis/closeness-centrality/}].

#### Betweenness centrality

This centrality index is related to the amount of shortest paths transversing a node. 
Nodes with a high betweenness centrality usually bridge different parts of the network and strongly influence the flow of information, as they lie in communication paths. 
These connector hubs (or bottlenecks) are also interesting for follow–up experiments because their removal can disconnect different regions of the network [@PMID:17447836].

Centrality measurements add new layers of information and allow for ranking differentially expressed proteins apart from their fold-change in abundance. 
**Figure 18** depicts a simple network consisting of proteins A to L, with A having the highest fold change (10) and L the lowest (2). 
In Panel A, the fill color for the nodes indicates this metric, where it can be easily seen that A stands out. 
However, protein A is a peripheral protein, only interacting with B. 
In Panel B, nodes are colored according to node degree. 
Clearly, protein F has the highest number of interactions and is also the closest to all other nodes, which can be appreciated when nodes are colored according to closeness centrality (Panel C). 
On the other hand, protein G acts as a bridge between two regions of the network and thus, has the highest betweenness centrality (Panel D). 
Except for fold change, node A has the lowest indices, and it will be up to the researcher to decide whether this protein warrants further examination.

![**Analysis of a simple network using different centrality measurements.** 
Nodes are colored according to each metric using a yellow-to-red gradient (yellow: lowest value, red: highest value). 
Network visualization and analysis were performed in Cytoscape.
](images/Simple%20network.png){#fig:simple-network tag="18" width="100%"}

### Network clustering

In the small network presented in **Figure 18**, two groups of densely connected nodes exist. 
This topology suggests that these communities (or "clusters") work together or participate in a protein complex. 
Dividing a network into clusters helps identify underlying relationships among nodes, which is especially useful in large networks. 
In a broad sense, network clustering groups nodes according to a topological property, generally interconnectedness. 
There are many network clustering algorithms, each with its own merits and approaches [@PMID:20158874; @PMID:17087821]. 
The MCL (Markov CLustering) algorithm is suitable for protein networks in most situations . 
On the other hand, the Molecular COmplex DEtection (MCODE) algorithm helps detect very densely connected nodes, thus unveiling protein complexes [@PMID:12525261]. 
In this regard, network clustering is useful for tentatively assigning the function of an uncharacterized protein. 
If the protein appears in a cluster, its function should be closely related to the cluster members, a principle known as "guilty by association." [@PMID:26215734]

### Network visualization

A critical step in network analysis is to display the data in a structured and uncluttered graph. 
Networks can rapidly become a hairball unamenable to interpretation. 
Software platforms like Cytoscape can be used to visualize networks orderly by applying layout algorithms and format styles [@PMID:14597658]. 
Since many of these platforms are open source, community-designed plugins enhance their capabilities. 
In Cytoscape, the stringApp adds a search bar to query the STRING database with accession numbers or protein names [@PMID:36512705]. 
The network is directly retrieved into Cytoscape, where its built-in network analyzer can be used to calculate centralities. 
Moreover, user-defined information, like fold-change values, can be integrated and mapped into the network.

### Functional term enrichment analysis: KEGG, String, GO, GSEA, ORA, Reactome, and others

<!-- To-Do: this section is redundant with the next section -->

Term enrichment analysis is performed to assess whether particular 'functional terms' are over-represented in a list of proteins (e.g. from a proteomics experiment) [@DOI:10.1007/978-1-4939-6783-4; @DOI:10.1016/j.ddtec.2021.06.007; @DOI:10.1152/physiolgenomics.00298.2007].
For example, after a differential abundance analysis, we may wish to examine whether there is any shared function amongst the proteins which were determined to have significant changes.
The simplest analysis to test whether this subset contains more of any particular functional terms than we would expect given the background of proteins.
For example, the Gene Ontology is split into the classes: Cellular Component, Molecular Function and Biological Function and we might be interested as to whether our proteins may be more likely to localize to a particular subcellular niche [@PMID:10802651].
The Cellular Component terms could give us a starting point if this might be the case, by examining if Cellular Component annotations are enriched. 

There are a number of databases and tools to perform such analysis, which can even be extended to examine whole pathways, networks, post-translational modification and literature representation.
For example, databases such as KEGG [@PMID:10592173], String [@PMID:33237311], Reactome [@PMID:31691815] and PhosphoSitePlus [@PMID:30445427] can be used to test or annotate a list of proteins.
For example, proteomics analysis of human cardiac 3D microtissue exposed to anthracyclines (drugs used in cancer chemotherapy) unearthed several proteins with altered levels [@PMID:33060801]. 
Many of these were specifically grouped under GO terms related to mitochondrial dysfunction, indicating the detrimental effects of these drugs on the organelle. 
GO terms [@PMID:10802651] or descriptors from other annotation libraries (like KEGG [@PMID:10592173] or REACTOME [@PMID:34788843]) can be retrieved from STRING when constructing a network or from other freely available compendiums. 
We refer to a number of articles on the topics, including tools, reviews and best-practice [@PMID:25430566; @PMID:33290552; @DOI:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009935].
The main points from such analysis is that we can obtain an insight about protein function by looking at whether our list of proteins have similar or the same annotations.
A number of limitations should be taken into account for interpretation.
The first is that proteins that are more abundant are more likely to be studied, measured and examined in the literature.
Hence, abundant proteins will have more annotations than less abundant ones.
One key part of the analysis is also to correctly select the background set; that is, the universe of protein which our list is being compared against.
By including contaminates or proteins that are not expressed in our system within the list, the results may be unfaithful. 

We may also have access to our own curated set of annotations derived either computational or experimental.
One may be interested in seeing whether we have enrichment of these annotations amongst the differentially abundant proteins.
Our list of proteins could be divided into two groups: differentially abundant or not. These groups could be divided into whether they have a particular annotation: yes or no.
This information can be summarized in a two-by-two table, to which we can apply a statistical test to examine whether that annotation is enriched within our differentially abundant proteins.
One test that could be used is the hypergeometric test, and another would be a Fisher Exact test.

There are many methods for performing functional enrichment analysis on the data, but they can mainly be classified into three categories (**Figure 19**), as follows.

![**Types of functional enrichment methods.** 
In the volcano plot (left), proteins with altered values are colored blue or red according to arbitrarily chosen cut-off values for significance and fold change. 
Black bars or thick-bordered nodes indicate members of a GO category.
](images/enrich_methods_v4.png){#fig:enrich_methods tag="19" width="100%"}

#### Over-representation analysis
  
In modern proteomics analysis, usually thousands of proteins are identified and quantified. 
Fold-change and significance thresholds are chosen (e.g., fold-change ≥ 2 and p ≤ 0.05) to obtain a list of proteins with altered levels among the tested conditions.
In over-representation methods, a contingency table is created for every protein set to establish whether proteins with altered abundance show an enrichment or a depletion of the ontology term compared to the background observed proteome [@PMID:32695141]. 
For example, suppose that 2000 proteins were quantified in a proteomics analysis, being 40 of these members of the set "tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA)." 
Also, let us assume that 200 proteins showed altered abundance, with 15 belonging to the TCA set. 
Then, the contingency table can be constructed as follows (Table 11):

Table 11: Example term enrichment analysis. 

|                             | **Proteins with altered abundance** | **Proteins with unaltered abundance** | **Total** |
|-----------------------------|:-----------------------------------:|:-------------------------------------:|:---------:|
| **Proteins in TCA set**     |                  15                 |                   25                  |     40    |
| **Proteins not in TCA set** |                 185                 |                  1775                 |    1960   |
| **Total**                   |                 200                 |                  1800                 |    2000   |

	                    
Then, a suitable statistical test is conducted to ascertain if proteins with altered levels are enriched in members of the TCA cycle (in this case, they are; p < 0.00001).
This is commonly achieved using Fisher's exact test [@DOI:10.2307/2340521].
The process is then repeated for every set as desired. 
Since multiple comparisons are tested, p values must be adjusted by a false discovery rate [@PMID:35263338].
There are also several free tools for term enrichment analysis, including [@PMID:23586463], GSEA [@DOI:10.1073/pnas.0506580102], and DAVID [@PMID:35325185].


#### Functional class scoring
  
The caveat of over-representation methods is that they rely on a list of differentially expressed genes or proteins with altered abundance, selected due to arbitrarily chosen cut-off values. 
For example, if we set a fold change cutoff of 2, a protein with a fold-change of 1.99 would not be included in the analysis. 
Moreover, several proteins belonging to the same set may have altered levels but are below the fold change threshold. 
However, moderate alterations of their abundance as a group could drive the observed phenotype, even more so than a single protein over the cut-off. 
Functional class scoring strategies aim at countering these limitations by disregarding thresholds altogether. 
GSEA (Gene Set Enrichment Analysis) is a widely used functional class scoring method in which all detected entities are first ranked according to a quantitative measurement (fold change, p-value, or their combination) [@PMID:16199517]. 
Then,  the distribution of members of a set is obtained. 
A scoring scheme based on the Kolmogorov – Smirnov test is used to assess whether there is an enrichment of the category towards the top or bottom of the ranked list.

#### Pathway topology-based methods 
  
Both methods mentioned above do not consider the functional relationships among proteins put forth by network analysis; i.e., they assume functional independence.
Topology-based enrichment methods incorporate this information by, for example, assigning an importance value to a set when its members also participate in a pathway or cluster together in a network [@PMID:24133454].
**Figure 19** shows how topology-based methods consider non-significant hits (grey nodes) that other strategies may not pick up, due to their position in a network.

### Other computational approaches: Network analysis, Isoform correlation analysis, AlphaFold, BLAST, protein language models

Additional computational analysis of a list of interesting proteins may uncover additional substructure, correlation or biologically useful hypothesis.
Building a network between the proteins based on the experiments performed might be a useful approach to identify additional structure.
For example, co-expression network analysis can be used to build a network from these proteins [@DOI:10.3410/f.727201931.793589848].
In these networks, proteins are nodes and edges describe relationships between those proteins.
Network-specific methods can then be applied, such as community detection algorithms which could uncover clusters of proteins with shared functions [@DOI:10.1101/2020.06.21.163543; @DOI:10.1016/j.physrep.2009.11.002].

One way the proteome generates complexity is through alternative-splicing, which results in protein isoforms [@https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.34477].

Recently, a number of tools have been proposed to identify peptide isoforms that are quantitatively different across conditions by using a principle called peptide correlation analysis [@DOI:10.1101/2020.12.22.423928; @PMID:33325715].
The idea is that the quantitative behavior of peptides should match each other.
If there are subgroups that behave coherently within the group but not across groups suggest that peptide may have come from a different proteoform.
These approaches can be used to identify specific proteoforms that are functional across different conditions.

For many, a protein’s structure reveals important functional details [@PMID:18429251].
There are a plethora of approaches to predict a protein’s structure [@DOI:10.1073/pnas.1821309116; @DOI:10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2; @PMID:34282049]. 
Recently, AlphaFold and RoseTTAFold have become dominant methods for predicting protein structures with high resolution [@DOI:10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2; @PMID:34282049]. 
If intrinsically disordered domains are of particular interest, methods explicitly designed for this task are recommended [@PMID:23203878].
Once a structure is obtained more elaborate computational methods might be useful such as docking or molecular dynamics [@PMID:21534921; @DOI:10.2147/AABC.S70333].
These approaches can give insight into how protein or molecules fit together and the dynamics of a protein's structure (conformational heterogeneity).
A complete discussion of these topics is beyond the scope of this section.

Another way to obtain insights into a protein function is to look for protein with similar sequences or motifs.
Using BLAST, a sequence alignment tool, one can align two or more protein sequences and determine their level of similarity [@PMID:2231712].
For example, if a human protein of unknown function has a similar sequence to a yeast protein with known function this may be a starting place for the putative function of that protein.

Novel approaches to representing the similarity of proteins have proved successful at predicting the functional properties of proteins.
Protein language models seek to learn “representation” of proteins, these are usually numerical vectors that represent a protein sequence [@DOI:10.1038/s42256-022-00457-9; @DOI:10.1016/j.cels.2021.05.017].
Abstractly, these vectors preserve protein similarity or a notion of “proteinness”. This usually means that two proteins that have a close vector may share similarities in protein function.
These representations are also advantageous because they can easily become the inputs for machine learning algorithms to predict valuable protein properties; for example, thermal stability values [@PMID:32133759], protein-protein binding affinities [@DOI:10.1002/wcms.1448], secondary protein structure, and more.

